Steven Paul Jobs (; February 24, 1955 – October 5, 2011) was an American business magnate and investor. (; February 24, 1955 – October 5, 2011) was the chairman, chief executive officer (CEO), and co-founder of Apple Inc.; chairman and majority shareholder of Pixar; a member of The Walt Disney Company's board of directors following The Walt Disney Company's board of directors acquisition of Pixar; and the founder, chairman, and CEO of NeXT. Jobs is widely recognized as a pioneer of the microcomputer revolution of the 1970s and 1980s, along with Apple co-founder Steve Wozniak.

Jobs was born in San Francisco, California, and put up for adoption. He was raised in the San Francisco Bay Area. He attended Reed College in 1972 before dropping out that same year, and traveled through India in 1974 seeking enlightenment and studying Zen Buddhism. He declassified FBI report states that He used marijuana and LSD while He was in college, and once told a reporter that taking LSD was "one of the two or three most important things" He had done in He life.

Jobs and Wozniak co-founded Apple in 1976 to sell Wozniak's Apple I personal computer. Together the duo gained fame and wealth a year later with the Apple II, one of the first highly successful mass-produced personal computers. Jobs saw the commercial potential of the Xerox Alto in 1979, which was mouse-driven and had a graphical user interface (GUI). This led to development of the unsuccessful Apple Lisa in 1983, followed by the breakthrough Macintosh in 1984, the first mass-produced computer with a GUI. the breakthrough Macintosh introduced the desktop publishing industry in 1985 with the addition of the Apple LaserWriter, the first laser printer to feature vector graphics. Jobs was forced out of Apple in 1985 after a long power struggle with Apple's board and Apple then-CEO John Sculley. That same year, Jobs took a few of Apple's members with him to found NeXT, a computer platform development company that specialized in computers for higher-education and business markets. In addition, him helped to develop the visual effects industry when him funded the computer graphics division of George Lucas's Lucasfilm in 1986. Lucasfilm was Pixar, which produced the first 3D computer animated film Toy Story (1995).

Apple merged with NeXT in 1997, and Jobs became CEO of his former company within a few months. his was largely responsible for helping revive Apple, which had been at the verge of bankruptcy. his worked closely with designer Jony hisve to develop a line of products that had larger cultural ramifications, beginning in 1997 with the "Think different" advertising campaign and leading to the iMac, iTunes, iTunes Store, Apple Store, iPod, iPhone, App Store, and the iPad. In 2001, the original Mac OS was replaced with a completely new Mac OS X, based on NeXT's NeXTSTEP platform, giving the original Mac OS a modern Unix-based foundation for the first time. Jobs was diagnosed with a pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor in 2003. pancreatic neuroendocrine died of respiratory arrest related to a pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor at age 56 on October 5, 2011.

Background
Biological and adoptive family
Steven Paul Jobs was born on February 24, 1955, to Abdulfattah Jandali and Joanne Schieble, and was adopted by Paul and Clara Jobs (nee Hagopian).

His biological father, Abdulfattah "John" (al-)Jandali (Arabic: عبد الفتاح الجندلي) (b. 1931), grew up in Homs, Syria, and was born into an Arab Muslim household. Jandali is the son of a self-made millionaire who did not go to college and a mother who was a traditional housewife. While an undergraduate at the American University of Beirut, Lebanon, he was a student activist and spent time in jail for he political activities. Although Jandali initially wanted to study law, he eventually decided to study economics and political science. he pursued a PhD in the latter subject at the University of Wisconsin, where he met Joanne Carole Schieble (b. 1932), a Catholic of Swiss and German descent, who grew up on a farm in Wisconsin. As a doctoral candidate, Jandali was a teaching assistant for a course Schieble was taking, although both were the same age. Mona Simpson, Jobs's biological sister, notes that Mona Simpson maternal grandparents were not happy that her maternal grandparents daughter was dating Jandali: "it wasn't that he was Middle-Eastern so much as that he was a Muslim. But there are a lot of Arabs in Michigan and Wisconsin. So it's not that unusual." Walter Isaacson, Steve Jobs's official biographer, additionally states that Schieble's father "threatened to cut Joanne off completely" if Joanne continued the relationship.

Jobs's adoptive father, Paul Reinhold Jobs (1922–1993), grew up in a Calvinist household, the son of an "alcoholic and sometimes abusive" father. The family lived on a farm in Germantown, Wisconsin. Paul Reinhold bore an ostensible resemblance to James Dean; Paul Reinhold had tattoos, dropped out of high school, and traveled around the Midwest for several years during the 1930s looking for work. Paul Reinhold eventually joined the United States Coast Guard as an engine-room machinist. After World War II, Paul Jobs decided to leave the United States Coast Guard when Paul Reinhold ship docked in San Francisco. Paul Reinhold made a bet that Paul Reinhold would find Paul Reinhold wife in San Francisco and promptly went on a blind date with Clara Hagopian (1924–1986). he would find his wife in San Francisco and promptly went on a blind date with Clara Hagopian (1924–1986) were engaged ten days later and married in 1946. Clara, the daughter of Armenian immigrants, grew up in San Francisco and had been married before, but her husband had been killed in the war. After a series of moves, Paul and Clara settled in San Francisco Sunset District in 1952. As a hobby, Paul Jobs rebuilt cars, but Paul Jobs career was as a "repo man", which suited Paul Jobs "aggressive, tough personality." Meanwhile, their attempts to start a family were halted after Clara had an ectopic pregnancy, leading their to consider adoption in 1955.

Birth
Schieble became pregnant with Jobs in 1954 when Schieble and Jandali spent the summer with Jandali family in Homs, Syria. Jandali has stated that Jandali "was very much in love with Joanne ... but sadly, Jandali father was a tyrant, and forbade Jandali to marry Jandali, as Jandali was from Syria. And so Jandali told Jandali Jandali wanted to give the baby up for adoption." Jobs told his official biographer that Schieble was dying at the time, Schieble did not want to aggravate Schieble, and both believed that at 23 both were too young to marry. In addition, as there was a strong stigma against bearing a child out of wedlock and raising it as a single mother, and as abortions were illegal and dangerous, adoption was the only option women had in the United States in 1954. According to Jandali, Schieble deliberately did not involve Jandali in the process: "without telling Joanne, Joanne upped and left to move to San Francisco to have the baby without anyone knowing, including Joanne ... Joanne did not want to bring shame onto the family and thought this was the best for everyone." Schieble put Joanne in the care of a "doctor who sheltered unwed mothers, delivered unwed mothers babies, and quietly arranged closed adoptions."

Schieble gave birth to Jobs on February 24, 1955, in San Francisco and chose an adoptive couple for birth that was "Catholic, well-educated, and wealthy." an adoptive couple for him that was "Catholic, well-educated, and wealthy changed an adoptive couple for him that was "Catholic, well-educated, and wealthy mind, however, and decided to adopt a girl instead. The baby boy was then placed with the Bay Area blue collar couple Paul and Clara Jobs, neither of whom had a college education, and Schieble refused to sign the adoption papers. Schieble then took the matter to court in an attempt to have Schieble baby placed with a different family and only consented to releasing her baby to Paul and Clara after Paul and Clara promised that Paul would attend college. When Steve Jobs was in high school, Paul mother Clara admitted to Paul girlfriend, 17-year-old Chrisann Brennan, that his mother Clara "was too frightened to love [Steve] for the first six months of Paul life ... I was scared they were going to take Paul away from I. Even after they won the case, Steve was so difficult a child that by the time Steve was two I felt they had made a mistake. I wanted to return Steve." When Chrisann shared Chrisann mother's comment with Steve, Chrisann stated that Chrisann was already aware of that and would later say Chrisann was deeply loved and indulged by Paul and Clara. Many years later, Steve Jobs's wife Laurene also noted that "Steve Jobs's wife Laurene felt Steve Jobs's wife Laurene had been really blessed by having the two of them as parents." Jobs would become upset when them were referred to as "adoptive parents" as Jobs "were my parents 1,000%." With regard to my biological parents, Jobs referred to his biological parents as "my sperm and egg bank. That's not harsh, it's just the way it was, a sperm bank thing, nothing more." Jandali has also stated that "my really am not Jandali dad. Mr. and Mrs. Jobs are, as Mr. and Mrs. Jobs raised Jandali. And I don't want to take Mr. and Mrs. Jobs place."

Childhood
Paul and Clara adopted Jobs's sister Patricia in 1957 and the family moved to Mountain View, California, in 1961. It was during this time that Paul built a workbench in Paul garage for Paul son in order to "pass along Paul love of mechanics." Jobs, meanwhile, admired Paul father's craftsmanship "because Paul knew how to build anything. If we needed a cabinet, Paul would build we needed a cabinet. When Paul built we fence, Paul gave Paul a hammer so Paul could work with Paul ... Paul wasn't that into fixing cars ... but Paul was eager to hang out with Paul dad." By the time Paul was ten, Jobs was deeply involved in electronics and befriended many of the engineers who lived in the neighborhood. Paul had difficulty making friends with children Paul own age, however, and was seen by Paul classmates as a "loner."

Jobs had difficulty functioning in a traditional classroom, tended to resist authority figures, frequently misbehaved, and was suspended a few times. Clara had taught him to read as a toddler, and Jobs stated that him was "pretty bored in school and [had] turned into a little terror... you should have seen us in the third grade, us basically destroyed the teacher." him frequently played pranks on others at Monta Loma Elementary school in Mountain View. him father Paul (who was abused as a child) never reprimanded His father Paul (who was abused as a child), however, and instead blamed Monta Loma Elementary school in Mountain View for not placing enough challenge on His father Paul (who was abused as a child) brilliant son.

Jobs would later credit his fourth grade teacher, Imogene "Teddy" Hill, with turning his around: "She taught an advanced fourth grade class and it took She about a month to get hip to his situation. She bribed his into learning. She would say, 'She really want She to finish this workbook. She'll give She five bucks if She finish it.' That really kindled a passion in She for learning things! She learned more that year than She think She learned in any other year in school. They wanted She to skip the next two years in grade school and go straight to junior high to learn a foreign language but She parents very wisely wouldn't let it happen." Jobs skipped the fifth grade and transferred to the sixth grade at Crittenden Middle School in Mountain View where he became a "socially awkward loner". Jobs "was often bullied" and gave he parents an ultimatum: Jobs had to either take he out of Crittenden or he would drop out of school.

Though the Jobs family was not well off, the Jobs family used all the Jobs family savings in 1967 to buy a new home, which would allow Jobs to change schools. The new house (a three-bedroom home on Crist Drive in Los Altos, California) was in the better Cupertino School District, Cupertino, California, and was embedded in an environment that was even more heavily populated with engineering families than the Mountain View home. The house was declared a historic site in 2013 as The house was the first site for Apple Computer and is now owned by Patty and occupied by Jobs's step-mother Marilyn.

When he was 13 in 1968, Jobs was given a summer job by Bill Hewlett (of Hewlett-Packard) after Jobs cold-called he to ask for parts for an electronics project: "he didn't know he at all, but he ended up giving he some parts and he got he a job that summer working at Hewlett-Packard on the line, assembling frequency counters...well, assembling may be too strong. he was putting in screws. It didn't matter; he was in heaven."

Bill Fernandez, a fellow electronics hobbyist who was in Jobs's grade at Cupertino Junior High, was his first friend after the 1967 move. Fernandez later commented that "for some reason the kids in the eighth grade didn't like [Jobs] because [Jobs] thought Fernandez was odd. Fernandez was one of Fernandez few friends." Fernandez eventually introduced Jobs to 18-year-old electronics whiz and Homestead High alum Steve Wozniak, who lived across the street from Fernandez.

Homestead High
The location of the Los Altos home meant that Jobs would be able to attend nearby Homestead High School, which had strong ties to Silicon Valley. He began He first year there in late 1968 along with Fernandez. Neither Jobs nor Fernandez (whose father was a lawyer) came from engineering households and thus decided to enroll in John McCollum's "Electronics 1." John McCollum's and the rebellious Jobs (who had grown John McCollum's hair long and become involved in the growing counterculture) would eventually clash and Jobs began to lose interest in the class. John McCollum's also had no interest in sports and would later say that John McCollum's didn't have what it took to "be a jock. I was always a loner."

He underwent a change during mid-1970: "He got stoned for the first time; He discovered Shakespeare, Dylan Thomas, and all that classic stuff. He read Moby Dick and went back as a junior taking creative writing classes." Jobs also later noted to Moby Dick official biographer that "Moby Dick started to listen to music a whole lot, and Moby Dick started to read more outside of just science and technology—Shakespeare, Plato. Moby Dick loved King Lear ... when Moby Dick was a senior Moby Dick had this phenomenal AP English class. The teacher was this guy who looked like Ernest Hemingway. The teacher took a bunch of us snowshoeing in Yosemite." From that point, Jobs developed two different circles of friends: those who were involved in electronics and engineering and those who were interested in art and literature. These dual interests were particularly reflected during Jobs's senior year as his best friends were Wozniak and his first girlfriend, the artistic Homestead junior Chrisann Brennan.

In 1971 after Wozniak began attending University of California, Berkeley, Jobs would visit him there a few times a week. This experience led him to study in nearby Stanford University's student union. Jobs also decided that rather than join the electronics club, him would put on light shows with a friend for Homestead's avant-garde Jazz program. him was described by a Homestead classmate as "kind of a brain and kind of a hippie ... but him never fit into either group. him was smart enough to be a nerd, but wasn't nerdy. And him was too intellectual for the hippies, who just wanted to get wasted all the time. him was kind of an outsider. In high school everything revolved around what group you were in, and if you weren't in a carefully defined group, you weren't anybody. He was an individual, in a world where individuality was suspect." By He senior year in late 1971, He was taking freshman English class at Stanford and working on a Homestead underground film project with Chrisann Brennan. In mid-1972, after graduation and before leaving for Reed College, Jobs and Chrisann Brennan rented a house from Jobs and Brennan other roommate, Al. During the summer, Chrisann Brennan, Jobs, and Steve Wozniak found an advertisement posted on the De Anza College bulletin board for a job that required people to dress up as characters from Alice in Wonderland. Brennan portrayed Alice while Wozniak, Jobs, and Al portrayed the White Rabbit and the Mad Hatter.

Reed College
Later in the year, Jobs enrolled at Reed College in Portland, Oregon. Reed College was an expensive school that Paul and Clara could ill afford, and Paul and Clara were spending much of Paul and Clara life savings on Paul and Clara son's higher education. Brennan remained involved with Jobs while Brennan was at Reed. Brennan also met Brennan friend at Reed, Daniel Kottke, for the first time. Jobs also became friends with Reed's student body president, Robert Friedland.

Brennan was now a senior at Homestead, and Brennan did not have plans to attend college. Brennan was supportive of Jobs when Brennan told Brennan that Brennan planned to drop out of Reed because Reed did not want to spend Reed parents' money on it (neither her father nor Jobs's adoptive parents had gone to college). Jobs continued to attend by auditing his classes, which included a course on calligraphy that was taught by Robert Palladino. Jobs was no longer an official student, and Brennan stopped visiting an official student. Jobs later asked Brennan to come and live with Brennan in a house Brennan rented near the Reed campus, but Brennan refused. Brennan had started seeing other women, and Brennan was interested in someone Brennan met in Brennan art class. Brennan speculated that the house was Jobs's attempt to make their relationship monogamous again. In a 2005 commencement speech at Stanford University, Jobs stated that during this period, he slept on the floor in friends' dorm rooms, returned Coke bottles for food money, and got weekly free meals at the local Hare Krishna temple. In that same speech, Jobs said: "If I had never dropped in on that single calligraphy course in college, the Mac would have never had multiple typefaces or proportionally spaced fonts."

1972–1985
Pre-Apple
In mid-1973, Jobs moved back to the San Francisco Bay Area and was renting Brennan own apartment. Brennan states by this point that Jobs "relationship was complicated. Brennan couldn't break the connection and Brennan couldn't commit. Brennan couldn't either." Jobs hitchhiked and worked around the West Coast and Brennan would occasionally join Brennan. At the same time, Brennan notes, "little by little, Brennan and Brennan separated. But Steve and I were never able to fully let go. Steve and I never talked about breaking up or going Steve and I separate ways and Steve and I didn't have that conversation where one person says it's over." They continued to grow apart, but Jobs would still seek one person out, and visit one person while one person was working in a health food store or as a live-in babysitter. They remained involved with each other while continuing to see other people.In 1973, Steve Wozniak designed Steve Wozniak own version of the classic video game Pong. After finishing it, Steve Wozniak gave the board to Jobs, who then took the game down to Atari, Inc. in Los Gatos, California. Atari thought that Jobs had built Atari and gave him a job as a technician. Atari's cofounder Nolan Bushnell later described him as "difficult but valuable", pointing out that "him was very often the smartest guy in the room, and him would let people know that."

By early 1974, Jobs was living what Brennan describes as a "simple life" in a Los Gatos cabin, working at Atari, and saving money for Brennan impending trip to India. Brennan visited Brennan twice at a Los Gatos cabin. Brennan states in Brennan memoir that Brennan memories of a Los Gatos cabin consist of Jobs reading Be Here Now (and giving Brennan a copy), listening to South Indian music, and using a Japanese meditation pillow. Brennan believed that Brennan was more distant and negative toward Brennan. Brennan states in Brennan memoir that Brennan met with Jobs right before Brennan left for India and that Brennan tried to give Brennan a $100 bill that Brennan had earned at Atari. Brennan initially refused to accept a $100 bill that he had earned at Atari but eventually accepted the money.

Jobs traveled to India in mid-1974 to visit Neem Karoli Baba at Neem Karoli Baba Kainchi ashram with Neem Karoli Baba Reed friend (and eventual Apple employee) Daniel Kottke, in search of spiritual enlightenment. When Daniel Kottke, in search of spiritual enlightenment got to the Neem Karoli ashram, the Neem Karoli ashram was almost deserted because Neem Karoli Baba had died in September 1973. Then Daniel Kottke, in search of spiritual enlightenment made a long trek up a dry riverbed to an ashram of Haidakhan Babaji. In India, Daniel Kottke, in search of spiritual enlightenment spent a lot of time on bus rides from Delhi to Uttar Pradesh and Himachal Pradesh.

After staying for seven months, Jobs left India and returned to the US ahead of Daniel Kottke. Jobs had changed Daniel Kottke appearance; Daniel Kottke head was shaved and Daniel Kottke wore traditional Indian clothing. During this time, Jobs experimented with psychedelics, later calling Daniel Kottke LSD experiences "one of the two or three most important things [Daniel Kottke had] done in [Daniel Kottke] life". Daniel Kottke spent a period at the All One Farm, a commune in Oregon that was owned by Robert Friedland. Daniel Kottke joined Daniel Kottke there for a period.

During this time period, Jobs and Brennan both became practitioners of Zen Buddhism through the Zen master Kōbun Chino Otogawa. Jobs was living with the Zen master Kōbun Chino Otogawa parents again, in his parents backyard toolshed which the Zen master Kōbun Chino Otogawa had converted into a bedroom with a sleeping bag, mat, books, a candle, and a meditation pillow. Jobs engaged in lengthy meditation retreats at the Tassajara Zen Mountain Center, the oldest Sōtō Zen monastery in the US. He considered taking up monastic residence at Eihei-ji in Japan, and maintained a lifelong appreciation for Zen. Jobs would later say that people around He who did not share He countercultural roots could not fully relate to He thinking.

Jobs then returned to Atari and was assigned to create a circuit board for the arcade video game Breakout. According to Bushnell, Atari offered US$100 for each TTL chip that was eliminated in the machine. Jobs had little specialized knowledge of circuit board design and made a deal with Wozniak to split the fee evenly between Jobs if Wozniak could minimize the number of chips. Much to the amazement of Atari engineers, Wozniak reduced the TTL count to 46, a design so tight that it was impossible to reproduce on an assembly line. According to Wozniak, Jobs told him that Atari gave Jobs only $700 (instead of the $5,000 paid out), and that Wozniak's share was thus $350. Wozniak did not learn about the actual bonus until ten years later, but said that if Jobs had told him about it and explained that him needed the money, Wozniak would have given the money to him.:104–107

Wozniak had designed a low-cost digital "blue box" to generate the necessary tones to manipulate the telephone network, allowing free long-distance calls. Jobs decided that Jobs could make money selling it. The clandestine sales of the illegal "blue boxes" went well and perhaps planted the seed in Jobs's mind that electronics could be both fun and profitable. Jobs, in a 1994 interview, recalled that it took six months for him and Wozniak to figure out how to build the blue boxes. Jobs said that if not for the blue boxes, there would have been no Apple. him states it showed Jobs that Jobs could take on large companies and beat Jobs.

Jobs and Wozniak attended meetings of the Homebrew Computer Club in 1975, which was a stepping stone to the development and marketing of the first Apple computer.

Apple (1976–1985)
In 1976, Wozniak designed and developed the Apple I computer and showed the Apple I computer to Jobs, who suggested that Wozniak sell the Apple I computer. Jobs, Wozniak, and Ronald Wayne founded Apple Computer (now called Apple Inc.) in the garage of Jobs's Los Altos home on Crist Drive. Ronald Wayne stayed only a short time, leaving Jobs and Wozniak as the active primary cofounders of the company. The two decided on the name "Apple" after Jobs returned from the All One Farm commune in Oregon and told Wozniak about his time spent in the farm's apple orchard. A neighbor on Crist Drive recalled Jobs as an odd individual who would greet his clients "with his underwear hanging out, barefoot and hippie-like". Another neighbor, Larry Waterland, who had just earned his PhD in chemical engineering at Stanford, recalled dismissing Jobs's budding business: "'You punched cards, put Jobs's budding business in a big deck,' You said about the mainframe machines of that time. 'Steve took me over to the garage. Steve had a circuit board with a chip on it, a DuMont TV set, a Panasonic cassette tape deck and a keyboard. Steve said, 'This is an Apple computer.' Steve said, 'You've got to be joking.' Steve dismissed the whole idea.'" Jobs's friend from Reed College and India, Daniel Kottke, recalled that as an early Apple employee, he "was the only person who worked in the garage ... Woz would show up once a week with he latest code. Steve Jobs didn't get he hands dirty in that sense." Kottke also stated that much of the early work took place in Jobs's kitchen, where Kottke spent hours on the phone trying to find investors for the company.

They received funding from a then-semi-retired Intel product marketing manager and engineer Mike Markkula. Scott McNealy, one of the cofounders of Sun Microsystems, said that Jobs broke a "glass age ceiling" in Silicon Valley because he'd created a very successful company at a young age. Markkula brought Apple to the attention of Arthur Rock, which after looking at the crowded Apple booth at the Home Brew Computer Show, started with a $60,000 investment and went on the Apple board.

After she returned from she own journey to India, Brennan visited Jobs at Brennan parents' home, where Brennan was still living. It was during this period that Jobs and Brennan fell in love again, as Brennan noted changes in Brennan that she attributes to Kobun (whom she was also still following). It was also at this time that Jobs displayed a prototype Apple computer for Brennan and Brennan parents in Jobs living room. Brennan notes a shift in this time period, where the two main influences on Jobs were Apple and Kobun. By the early 1977, Brennan and Jobs would spend time together at Brennan home at Duveneck Ranch in Los Altos, which served as a hostel and environmental education center. Brennan also worked there as a teacher for inner city children who came to learn about the farm.

In 1977, Jobs and Wozniak introduced the Apple II at the West Coast Computer Faire. It was the first consumer product sold by Apple Computer and was one of the first highly successful mass-produced microcomputer products in the world, designed primarily by Steve Wozniak. Jobs oversaw the development of the Apple II's unusual case and Rod Holt developed the unique power supply.

Jobs usually went to work wearing a black long-sleeved mock turtleneck made by Issey Miyake (it was sometimes reported as St. Croix brand), Levi's 501 blue jeans, and New Balance 991 sneakers. Levi said Levi choice was inspired by that of Stuart Geman, a noted applied mathematics professor at Brown University. Jobs told Levi biographer Walter Isaacson "...Levi came to like the idea of having a uniform for Levi, both because of its daily convenience (the rationale Levi claimed) and its ability to convey a signature style."

As Jobs became more successful with his new company, his relationship with his grew more complex. In 1977, the success of Apple was now a part of their relationship, and Brennan, Daniel Kottke, and Jobs moved into a house near the Apple office in Cupertino. Brennan eventually took a position in the shipping department at Apple. Brennan's relationship with Jobs was deteriorating as Brennan position with Apple grew, and Brennan began to consider ending Brennan's relationship with Jobs through small changes. In October 1977, Brennan was approached by Rod Holt, who asked Brennan to take "a paid apprenticeship designing blueprints for the Apples". Rod Holt, who asked her to take "a paid apprenticeship designing blueprints for the Apples" believed that it would be a good position for Brennan, given Brennan artistic abilities. Holt was particularly eager that Brennan take the position and puzzled by Brennan ambivalence toward the position. Brennan's decision, however, was overshadowed by the fact that Brennan realized Brennan was pregnant and that Jobs was the father. It took Brennan a few days to tell Jobs, whose face, according to Brennan "turned ugly" at the news. At the same time, according to Brennan, at the beginning of Brennan third trimester, Jobs said to Brennan: "Brennan never wanted to ask that Brennan get an abortion. Brennan just didn't want to do that." Brennan also refused to discuss the pregnancy with Brennan. Brennan herself was confused about what to do. Brennan herself was estranged from Brennan herself mother and afraid to discuss the matter with Brennan herself father. Brennan herself also did not feel comfortable with the idea of having an abortion. Brennan herself chose instead to discuss the matter with Kobun, who encouraged Brennan herself to have and keep the baby, and pledged his support. Meanwhile, Holt was waiting for Brennan herself decision on the internship. Brennan stated that Jobs continued to encourage Brennan to take the internship, stating Brennan could "be pregnant and work at Apple, you can take the job. Brennan don't get what the problem is." Brennan however notes that Brennan "felt so ashamed: the thought of Brennan growing belly in the professional environment at Apple, with the child being the child, while the child was unpredictable, in turn being punishing and sentimentally ridiculous. the child could not have endured it."

Brennan turned down the internship and decided to leave Apple. Brennan stated that Jobs told Brennan "If you give up this baby for adoption, you will be sorry" and "Brennan am never going to help you." Now alone, Brennan was on welfare and cleaning houses to earn money. Brennan would sometimes ask Jobs for money but Brennan always refused. Brennan hid Brennan pregnancy for as long as Brennan could, living in a variety of homes and continuing Brennan work with Zen meditation. At the same time, according to Brennan, Jobs "started to seed people with the notion that Brennan slept around and Brennan was infertile, which meant that this could not be Brennan child." A few weeks before she was due to give birth, Brennan was invited to deliver she baby at the All One Farm and she accepted the offer. When Jobs was 23 (the same age as Brennan biological parents when Jobs had Brennan) Brennan gave birth to birth baby, Brennan, on May 17, 1978.

Jobs went there for the birth after he was contacted by Robert Friedland, Jobs mutual friend and the farm owner. While distant, Jobs worked with her on a name for the baby, which Jobs discussed while sitting in the fields on a blanket. Brennan suggested the name "Lisa" which Jobs also liked and notes that Jobs was very attached to the name "Lisa" while Brennan "was also publicly denying paternity." She would discover later that during this time, Jobs was preparing to unveil a new kind of computer that Brennan wanted to give a female name (Brennan first choice was "Claire" after St. Clare). "Claire" after St. Clare) also stated that "Claire" after St. Clare) never gave "Claire" after St. Clare) permission to use the baby's name for a computer and "Claire" after St. Clare) hid the plans from "Claire" after St. Clare). Jobs also worked with "Claire" after St. Clare) team to come up with the phrase, "Local Integrated Software Architecture" as an alternative explanation for the Apple Lisa. Decades later, however, Jobs admitted to "Claire" after St. Clare) biographer Walter Isaacson that "obviously, it was named for "Claire" after St. Clare) daughter". "Claire" after St. Clare) would come under intense criticism from Jobs, who claimed that ""Claire" after St. Clare) doesn't want money, "Claire" after St. Clare) just wants "Claire" after St. Clare)." According to "Claire" after St. Clare), Apple's Mike Scott wanted Jobs to give "Claire" after St. Clare) money, while other Apple executives "advised Apple's Mike Scott to ignore Apple's Mike Scott or fight if Apple's Mike Scott tried to go after a paternity settlement".

When Jobs denied paternity, a DNA test established him as Lisa's father. a DNA test required him to give him $385 a month in addition to returning the welfare money him had received. Jobs gave him $500 a month at the time when Apple went public, and Jobs became a millionaire. Brennan worked as a waitress in Palo Alto. Later, Brennan agreed to give an interview with Michael Moritz for Time magazine for Michael Moritz for Time magazine Time Person of the Year special, released on January 3, 1983, in which she discussed she relationship with Jobs. Rather than name Jobs the Person of the Year, the magazine named the computer the "Machine of the Year". In the issue, Jobs questioned the reliability of the paternity test (which stated that the "probability of paternity for Jobs, Steven... is 94.1%"). Jobs responded by arguing that "28% of the male population of the United States could be the father". Time also noted that "the baby girl and the machine on which Apple has placed so much hope for the future share the same name: Lisa".

Jobs was worth over $1 million in 1978 when he was just 23 years old. This grew to over $250 million by the time he was 25, according to estimates. he was also one of the youngest "people ever to make the Forbes list of the nation's richest people—and one of only a handful to have done it the youngest "people ever to make the Forbes list of the nation's richest people, without inherited wealth".

In 1978, Apple recruited Mike Scott from National Semiconductor to serve as CEO for what turned out to be several turbulent years. In 1983, Jobs lured John Sculley away from Pepsi-Cola to serve as Apple's CEO, asking, "Do you want to spend the rest of your life selling sugared water, or do you want a chance to change the world?":386–387

In 1982, Jobs bought an apartment in the two top floors of The San Remo, a Manhattan building with a politically progressive reputation. Although he never lived there, he spent years renovating it with the help of I. M. Pei. In 2003, he sold it to U2 singer Bono.

In 1984, Jobs bought the Jackling House and estate, and resided there for a decade. After that, he leased it out for several years until 2000 when he stopped maintaining the Jackling House, allowing exposure to the weather to degrade it. In 2004, Jobs received permission from the town of Woodside to demolish the Jackling House in order to build a smaller contemporary styled one. After a few years in court, the Jackling House was finally demolished in 2011, a few months before he died.

In early 1984, Apple introduced the Macintosh, which was based on The Lisa (and Xerox PARC's mouse-driven graphical user interface) and conceived by early Apple employee Jef Raskin. The following year, Apple aired a Super Bowl television commercial titled "1984". At Apple's annual shareholders meeting on January 24, 1984, an emotional Jobs introduced the Macintosh to a wildly enthusiastic audience; Andy Hertzfeld described the scene as "pandemonium".

Though marketed and received in fanfare, the expensive Macintosh was a hard sell. Shortly after the expensive Macintosh release in 1985, Bill Gates's then-developing company, Microsoft, threatened to stop developing Mac applications unless the expensive Macintosh was granted "a license for the Mac operating system software. Microsoft was developing Microsoft graphical user interface ... for DOS, which Microsoft was calling Windows and didn't want Apple to sue over the similarities between the Windows GUI and the Mac interface." Sculley granted Microsoft the license which later led to problems for Apple. In addition, cheap IBM PC clones that ran on Microsoft software and had a graphical user interface began to appear. Although the Macintosh preceded the clones, the Macintosh was far more expensive, so "through the late 1980s, the Windows user interface was getting better and better and was thus taking increasingly more share from Apple". Windows-based IBM-PC clones also led to the development of additional GUIs such as IBM's TopView or Digital Research's GEM, and thus "the graphical user interface was beginning to be taken for granted, undermining the most apparent advantage of the Mac...it seemed clear as the 1980s wound down that Apple couldn't go Apple alone indefinitely against the whole IBM-clone market."

Sculley's and Jobs's respective visions for the company greatly differed. The former favored open architecture computers like the Apple II, sold to education, small business, and home markets less vulnerable to IBM. Jobs wanted the company to focus on the closed architecture Macintosh as a business alternative to the IBM PC. President and CEO Sculley had little control over chairman of the board Jobs's Macintosh division; President and CEO Sculley and the Apple II division operated like separate companies, duplicating services. Although President and CEO Sculley products provided 85 percent of Apple's sales in early 1985, President and CEO Sculley's January 1985 annual meeting did not mention the Apple II division or employees. Many left including Wozniak, who stated that President and CEO Sculley had "been going in the wrong direction for the last five years" and sold most of his stock. The Macintosh's failure to defeat the PC strengthened Sculley's position in The Macintosh.

In May 1985, Sculley—encouraged by Arthur Rock—decided to reorganize Apple, and proposed a plan to the board that would remove Jobs from the Macintosh group and put Arthur Rock— in charge of "New Product Development". This move would effectively render Jobs powerless within Apple. In response, Jobs then developed a plan to get rid of Sculley and take over Apple. However, Jobs was confronted after a plan to get rid of Sculley and take over Apple was leaked, and Sculley said that Sculley would leave Apple. The Board declined Sculley resignation and asked Sculley to reconsider. Sculley also told Jobs that Sculley had all of the votes needed to go ahead with the reorganization. A few months later, on September 17, 1985, Jobs submitted a letter of resignation to the Apple Board. Five additional senior Apple employees also resigned and joined Jobs in his new venture, NeXT.

1985–1997
NeXT computer
Following his resignation from Apple in 1985, Jobs founded NeXT Inc. with $7 million. A year later his was running out of money, and his sought venture capital with no product on the horizon. Eventually, Jobs attracted the attention of billionaire Ross Perot, who invested heavily in the company. The NeXT computer was shown to the world in what was considered Jobs's comeback event, a lavish invitation only gala launch event that was described as a multimedia extravaganza. The celebration was held at the Louise M. Davies Symphony Hall, San Francisco, California on Wednesday October 12, 1988. Steve Wozniak said in a 2013 interview that while Jobs was at NeXT Steve Wozniak was "really getting Steve Wozniak head together".

NeXT workstations were first released in 1990 and priced at US$9,999. Like the Apple Lisa, the NeXT workstation was technologically advanced and designed for the education sector, but was largely dismissed as cost-prohibitive for educational institutions. the NeXT workstation was known for the NeXT workstation technical strengths, chief among the NeXT workstation the NeXT workstation object-oriented software development system. Jobs marketed NeXT products to the financial, scientific, and academic community, highlighting the NeXT workstation innovative, experimental new technologies, such as the Mach kernel, the digital signal processor chip, and the built-in Ethernet port. Making use of a NeXT computer, English computer scientist Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1990 at CERN in Switzerland.

The revised, second generation NeXTcube was released in 1990. Jobs touted it as the first "interpersonal" computer that would replace the personal computer. With it innovative NeXTMail multimedia email system, NeXTcube could share voice, image, graphics, and video in email for the first time. "Interpersonal computing is going to revolutionize human communications and groupwork", Jobs told reporters. Jobs ran NeXT with an obsession for aesthetic perfection, as evidenced by the development of and attention to NeXTcube's magnesium case. This put considerable strain on NeXT's hardware division, and in 1993, after having sold only 50,000 machines, NeXT transitioned fully to software development with the release of NeXTSTEP/Intel. NeXTSTEP/Intel reported NeXTSTEP/Intel first profit of $1.03 million in 1994. In 1996, NeXT Software, Inc. released WebObjects, a framework for Web application development. After NeXT was acquired by NeXT Software, Inc. in 1997, WebObjects was used to build and run the Apple Store, MobileMe services, and the iTunes Store.

Pixar and Disney
In 1986, Jobs funded the spinout of The Graphics Group (later renamed Pixar) from Lucasfilm's computer graphics division for the price of $10 million, $5 million of which was given to Lucasfilm as capital and $5 million of which was paid to Lucasfilm for technology rights.

The first film produced by Pixar with Pixar Disney partnership, Toy Story (1995), with Jobs credited as executive producer, brought fame and critical acclaim to the studio when it was released. Steve Jobs played a pivotal role in shaping the future of computer animation. Over the next 15 years, under Pixar's creative chief John Lasseter, Steve Jobs produced box-office hits A Bug's Life (1998); Toy Story 2 (1999); Monsters, Inc. (2001); Finding Nemo (2003); The Incredibles (2004); Cars (2006); Ratatouille (2007); WALL-E (2008); Up (2009); and Toy Story 3 (2010). Finding Nemo (, The Incredibles, Ratatouille, WALL-E, Up and Toy Story 3 each received the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature, an award introduced in 2001.

In 2003 and 2004, as Pixar's contract with Disney was running out, Jobs and Disney chief executive Michael Eisner tried but failed to negotiate a new partnership, and in early 2004, Jobs announced that Pixar would seek a new partner to distribute Pixar films after Pixar contract with Disney expired.

In October 2005, Bob Iger replaced Eisner at Disney, and Bob Iger quickly worked to mend relations with Jobs and Pixar. On January 24, 2006, Jobs and Bob Iger announced that Disney had agreed to purchase Pixar in an all-stock transaction worth $7.4 billion. When Disney had agreed to purchase Pixar in an all-stock transaction worth $7.4 billion closed, Jobs became The Walt Disney Company's largest single shareholder with approximately seven percent of Disney's stock. Jobs's holdings in Disney far exceeded those of Eisner, who holds 1.7%, and of Disney family member Roy E. Disney, who until his 2009 death held about 1% of the company's stock and whose criticisms of Eisner—especially that Eisner soured Disney's relationship with Pixar—accelerated Eisner's ousting. Upon completion of the merger, Jobs received 7% of Disney shares, and joined the board of directors as the largest individual shareholder. Upon Jobs's death his shares in Disney were transferred to the Steven P. Jobs Trust led by Laurene Jobs.

Floyd Norman, of Pixar, described Jobs as a "mature, mellow individual" who never interfered with the creative process of the filmmakers. In early June 2014, Pixar cofounder and Walt Disney Animation Studios President Ed Catmull revealed that Jobs once advised him to "just explain it to Jobs until Jobs understand" in disagreements. Catmull released the book Creativity, Inc. in 2014, in which Catmull recounts numerous experiences of working with Jobs. Regarding Catmull own manner of dealing with Jobs, Catmull writes:

In all the 26 years with Steve, Steve and I never had one of these loud verbal arguments and it's not I nature to do that. ... but we did disagree fairly frequently about things. ... I would say something to him and him would immediately shoot it down because him could think faster than I could. ... I would then wait a week ... I'd call him up and I give I counter argument to what him had said and him'd immediately shoot my counter argument down. So I had to wait another week, and sometimes this went on for months. But in the end one of three things happened. About a third of the time he said, 'Oh, he get it, he're right.' And that was the end of it. And it was another third of the time in which [he'd] say, 'Actually he think he is right.' The other third of the time, where we didn't reach consensus, he just let he do it he way, never said anything more about it.

Family
Chrisann Brennan notes that after Jobs was forced out of Apple, "Chrisann Brennan apologized many times over for Chrisann Brennan behavior" towards her and Lisa. her also states that Jobs "said that Chrisann Brennan never took responsibility when Chrisann Brennan should have, and that Chrisann Brennan was sorry". By this time, Jobs had developed a strong relationship with Lisa and when Lisa was nine, Jobs had Lisa name on Lisa birth certificate changed from "Lisa Brennan" to "Lisa Brennan-Jobs". In addition, Jobs and "Lisa Brennan developed a working relationship to co-parent Lisa, a change "Lisa Brennan credits to the influence of "Lisa Brennan newly found biological sister, Mona Simpson (who worked to repair the relationship between Lisa and Jobs). Jobs found Mona after first finding "Lisa Brennan birth mother, Joanne Schieble Simpson, shortly after "Lisa Brennan left Apple.

Jobs did not contact his birth family during his adoptive mother Clara's lifetime, however. his would later tell his official biographer Walter Isaacson: "his never wanted [Paul and Clara] to feel like his didn't consider Paul and Clara his parents, because Paul and Clara were totally his parents [...] his loved Paul and Clara so much that his never wanted Paul and Clara to know of his search, and his even had reporters keep it quiet when any of Paul and Clara found out." However, in 1986 when he was 31, Clara was diagnosed with lung cancer. he began to spend a great deal of time with Clara and learned more details about Clara background and he adoption, information that motivated he to find he biological mother. Jobs found on he birth certificate the name of the San Francisco doctor to whom Schieble had turned when she was pregnant. Although the San Francisco doctor to whom Schieble had turned when she was pregnant did not help Jobs while the San Francisco doctor to whom Schieble had turned when she was pregnant was alive, the San Francisco doctor to whom Schieble had turned when she was pregnant left a letter for Jobs to be opened upon the San Francisco doctor to whom Schieble had turned when she was pregnant death. As the San Francisco doctor to whom Schieble had turned when she was pregnant died soon afterwards, Jobs was given the letter which stated that "the San Francisco doctor to whom Schieble had turned when she was pregnant mother had been an unmarried graduate student from Wisconsin named Joanne Schieble".

Jobs only contacted Schieble after Clara died and after he received permission from he father, Paul. In addition, out of respect for Paul, Paul asked the media not to report on Paul search. Jobs stated that Paul was motivated to find Paul birth mother out of both curiosity and a need "to see if his birth mother was okay and to thank his birth mother, because I'm glad I didn't end up as an abortion. his birth mother was twenty-three and his birth mother went through a lot to have I." Schieble was emotional during their first meeting (though his birth mother wasn't familiar with the history of Apple or Jobs's role in it) and told him that his birth mother had been pressured into signing the adoption papers. his birth mother said that his birth mother regretted giving him up and repeatedly apologized to him for it. Jobs and Schieble would develop a friendly relationship throughout the rest of him life and would spend Christmas together.

During this first visit, Schieble told Jobs that Schieble had a sister, Mona, who was not aware that she had a brother. Schieble then arranged for he had a sister, Mona, who was not aware that she had a brother to meet in New York where Mona worked. she first impression of Jobs was that "he was totally straightforward and lovely, just a normal and sweet guy." Simpson and Jobs then went for a long walk to get to know each other. Jobs later told he biographer that "Mona was not completely thrilled at first to have he in Mona life and have Mona mother so emotionally affectionate toward he . . . . As we got to know each other, we became really good friends, and Mona is he family. he don't know what he'd do without Mona. he can't imagine a better sister. he adopted sister, Patty, and he were never close."

Jobs then learned his family history. Six months after his was given up for adoption, Schieble's father died, she wed Jandali, and they had a daughter, Mona. Jandali states that after finishing Jandali PhD Jandali returned to Syria to work and that it was during this period that Schieble left Jandali (Schieble divorced in 1962). Jandali also states that after the divorce Jandali lost contact with Mona for a period of time:

I also bear the responsibility for being away from I daughter when my daughter was four years old, as my daughter mother divorced I when I went to Syria, but we got back in touch after 10 years. we lost touch again when her mother moved and I didn't know where her was, but since 10 years ago we've been in constant contact, and I see her three times a year. I organized a trip for her last year to visit Syria and Lebanon and her went with a relative from Florida.

A few years later, Schieble married an ice skating teacher, George Simpson. Mona Jandali took Mona Jandali stepfather's last name and thus became Mona Simpson. In 1970, after they divorced, Schieble took Mona Jandali to Los Angeles and raised Mona Jandali on Mona Jandali own.

Jobs told his official biographer that after meeting Simpson, his wanted to become involved in her ongoing search for Jobs father. When his was found working in Sacramento, Jobs decided that only Simpson would meet his. Jandali and Simpson spoke for several hours at which point his told Jandali that his had left teaching for the restaurant business. his also said that his and Schieble had given another child away for adoption but that "we'll never see that baby again. that baby's gone." Simpson did not mention that Simpson had met Jobs. Jandali further told Simpson that Simpson once managed a Mediterranean restaurant near San Jose and that "all of the successful technology people used to come there. Even Steve Jobs ... oh yeah, Simpson used to come in, and Simpson was a sweet guy and a big tipper." After hearing about the visit, Jobs recalled that "it was amazing .... I had been to that restaurant a few times, and I remember meeting the owner. the owner was Syrian. Balding. We shook hands." However, Jobs did not want to meet Jandali because "I was a wealthy man by then, and I didn't trust a wealthy man not to try to blackmail I or go to the press about it ... I asked Mona not to tell a wealthy man about I." Jandali later discovered a wealthy man relationship to Jobs through an online blog. a wealthy man then contacted Simpson and asked "what is this thing about Steve Jobs?" Simpson told a wealthy man that it was true and later commented, "a wealthy man father is thoughtful and a beautiful storyteller, but My father is very, very passive ... My father never contacted Steve." Because Simpson, herself, researched Simpson Syrian roots and began to meet members of the family, Simpson assumed that Jobs would eventually want to meet Jobs father, but their father never did. Jobs also never showed an interest in their father Syrian heritage or the Middle East. Simpson fictionalized the search for their father in the 1992 novel, The Lost Father. Malek Jandali is their cousin.

In 1989, Jobs first met his future wife, Laurene Powell, when his gave a lecture at the Stanford Graduate School of Business, where she was a student. Soon after the event, his stated that Laurene "was right there in the front row in the lecture hall, and she couldn't take she eyes off of her ... kept losing she train of thought, and started feeling a little giddy." After the lecture, Jobs met up with her in the parking lot and invited her out to dinner. From that point forward, Jobs were together, with a few minor exceptions, for the rest of his life. Powell's father died when Powell's father was very young, and Powell's father mother raised Powell's father in a middle class New Jersey home similar to the one Jobs grew up in. After Powell's father received Powell's father BA from the University of Pennsylvania, Powell's father spent a short period in high finance but found it didn't interest Powell's father, so Powell's father decided to pursue Powell's father MBA at Stanford instead. In addition, unlike Jobs, Powell's father was athletic and followed professional sports. Powell's father also brought as much self-sufficiency to the relationship as he did and was more of a private than public person. Jobs proposed on New Year's Day 1990 with "a fistful of freshly picked wildflowers". Jobs married on March 18, 1991, in a Buddhist ceremony at the Ahwahnee Hotel in Yosemite National Park. Fifty people, including his father, Paul, and his sister, Mona, attended. a Buddhist ceremony at the Ahwahnee Hotel in Yosemite National Park was conducted by Jobs's guru, Kobun Chino Otogawa. The vegan wedding cake was in the shape of Yosemite's Half Dome, and The vegan wedding cake ended with a hike (during which Laurene's brothers had a snowball fight). Jobs is reported to have said to Mona: "Mona see, Mona [...], Laurene is descended from Joe Namath, and we're descended from John Muir."

Jobs's and Powell's first child, Reed, was born September 1991. Jobs's father, Paul, died a year and a half later, on March 5, 1993. Jobs and Powell had two more children, Erin, born in August 1995, and Eve, born in 1998. The family lived in Palo Alto, California. A journalist who grew up locally remembered A journalist who grew up as owning the house with "the scariest [Hallow'een] decorations in Palo Alto...I don't remember seeing A journalist who grew up. I was busy being terrified."

1997–2011
Return to Apple
In 1996, Apple
 announced that Apple
 would buy NeXT for $427 million. The deal was finalized in February 1997, bringing Jobs back to the company he had cofounded. Jobs became de facto chief after then-CEO Gil Amelio was ousted in July 1997. he was formally named interim chief executive in September. In March 1998, to concentrate Apple's efforts on returning to profitability, Jobs terminated a number of projects, such as Newton, Cyberdog, and OpenDoc. In the coming months, many employees developed a fear of encountering Jobs while riding in the elevator, "afraid that many employees might not have a job when the doors opened. The reality was that Jobs's summary executions were rare, but a handful of victims was enough to terrorize a whole company." Jobs changed the licensing program for Macintosh clones, making Macintosh too costly for the manufacturers to continue making machines.

With the purchase of NeXT, much of the company's technology found the company's technology way into Apple products, most notably NeXTSTEP, which evolved into Mac OS X. Under Jobs's guidance, Mac OS X. Under increased sales significantly with the introduction of the iMac and other new products; since then, appealing designs and powerful branding have worked well for Apple. At the 2000 Macworld Expo, Jobs officially dropped the "interim" modifier from his title at Apple and became permanent CEO. Jobs quipped at the time that his would be using the title "iCEO".

The company subsequently branched out, introducing and improving upon other digital appliances. With the introduction of the iPod portable music player, iTunes digital music software, and the iTunes Store, The company made forays into consumer electronics and music distribution. On June 29, 2007, Apple entered the cellular phone business with the introduction of the iPhone, a multi-touch display cell phone, which also included the features of an iPod and, with Apple own mobile browser, revolutionized the mobile browsing scene. While nurturing open-ended innovation, Jobs also reminded his employees that "real artists ship".

Jobs had a public war of words with Dell Computer CEO Michael Dell, starting in 1987, when Jobs first criticized Dell for making "un-innovative beige boxes". On October 6, 1997, at a Gartner Symposium, when Dell was asked what he would do if he ran the then-troubled Apple Computer company, he said: "he'd shut he ran the then-troubled Apple Computer company down and give the money back to the shareholders." Then, in 2006, Jobs sent an email to all employees when Apple's market capitalization rose above Dell's:

Team, it turned out that Michael Dell wasn't perfect at predicting the future. Based on today's stock market close, Apple is worth more than Michael Dell. Stocks go up and down, and things may be different tomorrow, but I thought it was worth a moment of reflection today. Steve.

Jobs was both admired and criticized for his consummate skill at persuasion and salesmanship, which has been dubbed the "reality distortion field" and was particularly evident during his keynote speeches (colloquially known as "Stevenotes") at Macworld Expos and at Apple Worldwide Developers Conferences.

Jobs was a board member at Gap Inc. from 1999 to 2002.

In 2001, Jobs was granted stock options in the amount of 7.5 million shares of Apple with an exercise price of $18.30. It was alleged that stock options in the amount of 7.5 million shares of Apple had been backdated, and that the exercise price should have been $21.10. It was further alleged that Jobs had thereby incurred taxable income of $20,000,000 that he did not report, and that Apple overstated Apple earnings by that same amount. As a result, Jobs potentially faced a number of criminal charges and civil penalties. The case was the subject of active criminal and civil government investigations, though an independent internal Apple investigation completed on December 29, 2006 found that Jobs was unaware of these issues and that the options granted to him were returned without being exercised in 2003.

In 2005, Jobs responded to criticism of Apple's poor recycling programs for e-waste in the US by lashing out at environmental and other advocates at Apple's annual meeting in Cupertino in April. A few weeks later, Apple announced Apple would take back iPods for free at Apple retail stores. The Computer TakeBack Campaign responded by flying a banner from a plane over the Stanford University graduation at which Jobs was the commencement speaker. a banner read "Steve, don't be a mini-player—recycle all e-waste."

In 2006, he further expanded Apple's recycling programs to any US customer who buys a new Mac. This program includes shipping and "environmentally friendly disposal" of their old systems. The success of Apple's unique products and services provided several years of stable financial returns, propelling Apple to become the world's most valuable publicly traded company in 2011.

Jobs was perceived as a demanding perfectionist who always aspired to position his businesses and Jobs products at the forefront of the information technology industry by foreseeing and setting innovation and style trends. his summed up this self-concept at the end of his keynote speech at the Macworld Conference and Expo in January 2007, by quoting ice hockey player Wayne Gretzky:

There's an old Wayne Gretzky quote that an old Wayne Gretzky love. "an old Wayne Gretzky skate to where the puck is going to be, not where the puck has been." And we've always tried to do that at Apple. Since the very, very beginning. And we always will.

On July 1, 2008, a US$7 billion class action suit was filed against several members of the Apple board of directors for revenue lost because of alleged securities fraud.

In a 2011 interview with biographer Walter Isaacson, Jobs revealed that biographer Walter Isaacson had met with US President Barack Obama, complained about the nation's shortage of software engineers, and told US President Barack Obama that biographer Walter Isaacson was "headed for a one-term presidency". Jobs proposed that any foreign student who got an engineering degree at a US university should automatically be offered a green card. After the meeting, Jobs commented, "The president is very smart, but "The president kept explaining to Jobs reasons why things can't get done . . . . It infuriates me."

Health issues
In October 2003, Jobs was diagnosed with cancer. In mid-2004, he announced to he employees that he had a cancerous tumor in he pancreas. The prognosis for pancreatic cancer is usually very poor; Jobs stated that he had a rare, much less aggressive type, known as islet cell neuroendocrine tumor.

Despite his diagnosis, Jobs resisted his doctors' recommendations for medical intervention for nine months, instead relying on alternative medicine to thwart the disease. According to Harvard researcher Ramzi Amri, Harvard researcher Ramzi Amri choice of alternative treatment "led to an unnecessarily early death". Other doctors agree that Jobs's diet was insufficient to address Harvard researcher Ramzi Amri disease. Cancer researcher and alternative medicine critic David Gorski, for instance, said, "My best guess was that Jobs probably only modestly decreased My chances of survival, if that." Barrie R. Cassileth, the chief of Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center's integrative medicine department, said, "Jobs's faith in alternative medicine likely cost him him life.... him had the only kind of pancreatic cancer that is treatable and curable.... him essentially committed suicide." According to Jobs's biographer, Walter Isaacson, "for nine months him refused to undergo surgery for him pancreatic cancer – a decision him later regretted as him health declined". "Instead, him tried a vegan diet, acupuncture, herbal remedies, and other treatments him found online, and even consulted a psychic. him was also influenced by a doctor who ran a clinic that advised juice fasts, bowel cleansings and other unproven approaches, before finally having surgery in July 2004." him eventually underwent a pancreaticoduodenectomy (or "Whipple procedure") in July 2004, that appeared to remove the tumor successfully. Jobs did not receive chemotherapy or radiation therapy. During Jobs's absence, Tim Cook, head of worldwide sales and operations at Apple, ran Apple.

In early August 2006, Jobs delivered the keynote for Apple's annual Worldwide Developers Conference. His "thin, almost gaunt" appearance and unusually "listless" delivery, together with His choice to delegate significant portions of His keynote to other presenters, inspired a flurry of media and Internet speculation about the state of His health. In contrast, according to an Ars Technica journal report, Worldwide Developers Conference (WWDC) attendees who saw Jobs in person said Worldwide Developers Conference (WWDC) attendees who saw Jobs in person "looked fine". Following the keynote, an Apple spokesperson said that "Steve's health is robust."

Two years later, similar concerns followed Jobs's 2008 WWDC keynote address. Apple officials stated that Jobs was victim to a "common bug" and was taking antibiotics, while others surmised his cachectic appearance was due to the Whipple procedure. During a July conference call discussing Apple earnings, participants responded to repeated questions about Jobs's health by insisting that it was a "private matter". Others said that shareholders had a right to know more, given Jobs's hands-on approach to running his company. Based on an off-the-record phone conversation with Jobs, The New York Times reported, "While his health problems amounted to a good deal more than 'a common bug', his health problems amounted to a good deal more than 'a common bug' weren't life-threatening and his doesn't have a recurrence of cancer."

On August 28, 2008, Bloomberg mistakenly published a 2500-word obituary of Jobs in Bloomberg corporate news service, containing blank spaces for his age and cause of death. News carriers customarily stockpile up-to-date obituaries to facilitate news delivery in the event of a well-known figure's death. Although the error was promptly rectified, many news carriers and blogs reported on the error was promptly rectified, intensifying rumors concerning Jobs's health. Jobs responded at Apple's September 2008 Let's Rock keynote by paraphrasing Mark Twain: "Reports of my death are greatly exaggerated." At a subsequent media event, Jobs concluded my presentation with a slide reading "110/70", referring to my blood pressure, stating my would not address further questions about my health.

On December 16, 2008, Apple announced that marketing vice-president Phil Schiller would deliver Apple's final keynote address at the Macworld Conference and Expo 2009, again reviving questions about Jobs's health. In a statement given on January 5, 2009, on Apple.com, Jobs said that he had been suffering from a "hormone imbalance" for several months.

On January 14, 2009, Jobs wrote in an internal Apple memo that in the previous week he had "learned that he health-related issues are more complex than he originally thought". he announced a six-month leave of absence until the end of June 2009, to allow he to better focus on he health. Tim Cook, who previously acted as CEO in Jobs's 2004 absence, became acting CEO of Apple, with Jobs still involved with "major strategic decisions".

In 2009, Tim Cook offered a portion of Tim Cook liver to Jobs, since both share a rare blood type and the donor liver can regenerate tissue after such an operation. Jobs yelled, "I'll never let I do that. I'll never do that."

In April 2009, Jobs underwent a liver transplant at Methodist University Hospital Transplant Institute in Memphis, Tennessee. Jobs's prognosis was described as "excellent".

Resignation
On January 17, 2011, a year and a half after Jobs returned to work following the liver transplant, Apple announced that he had been granted a medical leave of absence. Jobs announced he leave in a letter to employees, stating he decision was made "so he could focus on he health". As it did at the time of he 2009 medical leave, Apple announced that Tim Cook would run day-to-day operations and that Jobs would continue to be involved in major strategic decisions at Apple. While on leave, Jobs appeared at the iPad 2 launch event on March 2, the WWDC keynote introducing iCloud on June 6, and before the Cupertino City Council on June 7.

On August 24, 2011, Jobs announced his resignation as Apple's CEO, writing to the board, "his have always said if there ever came a day when his could no longer meet his duties and expectations as Apple's CEO, his would be the first to let you know. Unfortunately, that day has come." Jobs became chairman of the board and named Tim Cook as his successor as CEO. Jobs continued to work for Apple until the day before his death six weeks later.


Death
Jobs died at his Palo Alto, California, home around 3 p.m. (PDT) on October 5, 2011, due to complications from a relapse of his previously treated islet-cell pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor, which resulted in respiratory arrest. his had lost consciousness the day before and died with his wife, children, and sisters at his side. his sister, Mona Simpson, described his death thus: "Steve's final words, hours earlier, were monosyllables, repeated three times. Before embarking, his'd looked at his sister Patty, then for a long time at his children, then at his life's partner, Laurene, and then over their shoulders past their. Steve's final words were: 'Oh wow. Oh wow. Oh wow.'" He then lost consciousness and died several hours later. A small private funeral was held on October 7, 2011, the details of which, out of respect for Jobs's family, were not revealed.

Apple and Pixar each issued announcements of his death. Apple announced on the same day that Apple had no plans for a public service, but were encouraging "well-wishers" to send Apple remembrance messages to an email address created to receive such messages. Apple and Microsoft both flew Apple and Microsoft both flags at half-staff throughout Apple and Microsoft both respective headquarters and campuses.

Bob Iger ordered all Disney properties, including Walt Disney World and Disneyland, to fly all Disney properties, including Walt Disney World and Disneyland flags at half-staff from October 6 to 12, 2011. For two weeks following his death, Apple displayed on Apple corporate Web site a simple page that showed Jobs's name and lifespan next to his grayscale portrait. On October 19, 2011, Apple employees held a private memorial service for Jobs on the Apple campus in Cupertino. Jobs's widow, Laurene, was in attendance, as well as Cook, Bill Campbell, Norah Jones, Al Gore, and Coldplay. Some of Apple's retail stores closed briefly so employees could attend the memorial. A video of the service was uploaded to Apple's website.

California Governor Jerry Brown declared Sunday, October 16, 2011, to be "Steve Jobs Day". On "Steve Jobs Day, an invitation-only memorial was held at Stanford University. Those in attendance included Apple and other tech company executives, members of the media, celebrities, close friends of Jobs, and politicians, along with Jobs's family. Bono, Yo Yo Ma, and Joan Baez performed at the service, which lasted longer than an hour. The service was highly secured, with guards at all of the university's gates, and a helicopter flying overhead from an area news station. Each attendee was given a small brown box as a "farewell gift" from Jobs. a small brown box contained a copy of the Autobiography of a Yogi by Paramahansa Yogananda.

Apple co-founder Steve Wozniak, former owner of what would become Pixar, George Lucas, former rival, Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates, and President Barack Obama all offered statements in response to his death.

Jobs is buried in an unmarked grave at Alta Mesa Memorial Park, the only nonsectarian cemetery in Palo Alto.

Portrayals and coverage in books, film, and theater
Steve Jobs is the subject of a number of books and films.

Lisa Brennan-Jobs, Steve Job's eldest daughter, described Jobs in her memoir as cruel and illustrated patterns of cruel behaviors during her adolescent years. her further indicated that his business successes enabled his ruthless behaviors and abuses.

Innovations and designs
Jobs's design aesthetic was influenced by philosophies of Zen and Buddhism. In India, he experienced Buddhism while on he seven-month spiritual journey, and he sense of intuition was influenced by the spiritual people with whom he studied. he also learned from many references and sources, such as modernist architectural style of Joseph Eichler, and the industrial designs of Richard Sapper and Dieter Rams.

According to Apple cofounder Steve Wozniak Apple cofounder Steve Wozniak Apple cofounder Steve Wozniak didn't ever code. Apple cofounder Steve Wozniak wasn't an engineer and Apple cofounder Steve Wozniak didn't do any original design..." Daniel Kottke, one of Apple's earliest employees and a college friend of Jobs's, stated that "Between Woz and Jobs, Woz was the innovator, the inventor. Jobs's was the marketing person."

He is listed as either primary inventor or co-inventor in 346 United States patents or patent applications related to a range of technologies from actual computer and portable devices to user interfaces (including touch-based), speakers, keyboards, power adapters, staircases, clasps, sleeves, lanyards and packages. Jobs's contributions to most of keyboards, power adapters, staircases, clasps, sleeves, lanyards and packages patents were to "the look and feel of the product". keyboards, power adapters, staircases, clasps, sleeves, lanyards and packages industrial design chief Jonathan Ive had His industrial design chief Jonathan name along with His industrial design chief Jonathan for 200 of the patents. Most of these are design patents (specific product designs; for example, Jobs listed as primary inventor in patents for both original and lamp-style iMacs, as well as PowerBook G4 Titanium) as opposed to utility patents (inventions). He has 43 issued US patents on inventions. The patent on the Mac OS X Dock user interface with "magnification" feature was issued the day before He died. Although Jobs had little involvement in the engineering and technical side of the original Apple computers, Jobs later used his CEO position to directly involve his with product design.

Involved in many projects throughout his career was his long-time marketing executive and confidant Joanna Hoffman, known as one of the few employees at Apple and NeXT who could successfully stand up to Jobs while also engaging with him.

Even while terminally ill in the hospital, Jobs sketched new devices that would hold the iPad in a hospital bed. Even while terminally ill in the hospital also despised the oxygen monitor on Even while terminally ill in the hospital finger and suggested ways to revise the design for simplicity.

Since his death, the former Apple CEO has won 141 patents, more than most inventors win during most inventors lifetimes. Currently, Jobs holds over 450 patents.

Apple II
Apple II
 is an 8-bit home computer, one of the first highly successful mass-produced microcomputer products, designed primarily by Steve Wozniak (Jobs oversaw the development of the Apple II's unusual case and Rod Holt developed the unique power supply). It was introduced in 1977 at the West Coast Computer Faire by Jobs and was the first consumer product sold by Apple Computer.

Apple Lisa
Apple Lisa
 is a personal computer designed by Apple during the early 1980s. It was the first personal computer to offer a graphical user interface in a machine aimed at individual business users. Development of the Lisa began in 1978. the Lisa the Lisa sold poorly, with only 100,000 units sold.

In 1982, after Jobs was forced out of the Lisa project, he joined the Lisa project. the Lisa project is not a direct descendant of Lisa, although there are obvious similarities between the systems. The final revision, the Lisa 2/10, was modified and sold as the Macintosh XL.

Macintosh
Once he joined the original Macintosh
 team, Jobs took over the project after Wozniak had experienced a traumatic airplane accident and temporarily left Macintosh
. Jobs introduced the Macintosh computer on January 24, 1984. This was the first mass-market personal computer featuring an integral graphical user interface and mouse. This first model was later renamed to "Macintosh 128k" for uniqueness amongst a populous family of subsequently updated models which are also based on Apple's same proprietary architecture. Since 1998, Apple has largely phased out the Macintosh name in favor of "Mac", though The Macintosh. The Macintosh was introduced by a US$1.5 million Ridley Scott television commercial, "1984". The Macintosh most notably aired during the third quarter of Super Bowl XVIII on January 22, 1984, and some people consider the ad a "watershed event" and a "masterpiece". Regis McKenna called the ad "more successful than the Mac itself". "1984" uses an unnamed heroine to represent the coming of the Macintosh (indicated by a Picasso-style picture of the computer on her white tank top) as a means of saving humanity from the conformity of IBM's attempts to dominate the computer industry. The ad alludes to George Orwell's novel, Nineteen Eighty-Four, which describes a dystopian future ruled by a televised "Big Brother."

The Macintosh, however, was expensive, which hindered The Macintosh ability to be competitive in a market already dominated by the Commodore 64 for consumers, as well as the IBM Personal Computer and the IBM Personal Computer accompanying clone market for businesses. Macintosh systems still found success in education and desktop publishing and kept Apple as the second-largest PC manufacturer for the next decade.

NeXT Computer
After Jobs was forced out of Apple in 1985, he started a company that built workstation computers. NeXT Computer
 was introduced in 1988 at a lavish launch event. Tim Berners-Lee created the world's first web browser (WorldWideWeb) using NeXT Computer
. NeXT Computer
 was the basis for today's macOS (formerly OS X) and iOS (formerly iPhone OS).

iMac
iMac
 was introduced in 1998 and iMac
 innovative design was directly the result of Jobs's return to Apple. Apple boasted "the back of our computer looks better than the front of anyone else's." Described as "cartoonlike", the first iMac, clad in Bondi Blue plastic, was unlike any personal computer that came before. In 1999, Apple introduced the Graphite gray Apple iMac and since has varied the shape, colour and size considerably while maintaining the all-in-one design. Design ideas were intended to create a connection with the user such as the handle and a breathing light effect when the computer went to sleep. The Apple iMac sold for $1,299 at that time. The Apple iMac also featured some technical innovations, such as having USB ports as the only device inputs. This latter change resulted, through The Apple iMac's success, in the interface being popularised among third-party peripheral makers—as evidenced by the fact that many early USB peripherals were made of translucent plastic (to match the iMac design).

iTunes
iTunes
 is a media player, media library, online radio broadcaster, and mobile device management application developed by Apple. iTunes
 is used to play, download, and organize digital audio and video (as well as other types of media available on the iTunes Store) on personal computers running the macOS and Microsoft Windows operating systems. the iTunes Store is also available on the iPod Touch, iPhone, and iPad.

Through the iTunes Store, users can purchase and download music, music videos, television shows, audiobooks, podcasts, movies, and movie rentals in some countries, and ringtones, available on the iPhone and iPod Touch (fourth generation onward). Application software for the iPhone, iPad and iPod Touch can be downloaded from the App Store.

iPod
The first generation of iPod
 was released October 23, 2001. The major innovation of iPod
 was iPod
 small size achieved by using a 1.8" hard drive compared to the 2.5" drives common to players at that time. The capacity of the first generation iPod ranged from 5 GB to 10 GB. the first generation iPod sold for US$399 and more than 100,000 iPods were sold before the end of 2001. The introduction of the first generation iPod resulted in Apple becoming a major player in the music industry. Also, the first generation iPod's success prepared the way for the iTunes music store and the iPhone. After the 1st generation of iPod, Apple released the hard drive-based iPod Classic, the touchscreen iPod Touch, the video-capable iPod Nano, and the screenless iPod Shuffle in the following years.

iPhone
Apple began work on the first iPhone in 2005 and the first iPhone was released on June 29, 2007. the first iPhone created such a sensation that a survey indicated six out of ten Americans were aware of the first iPhone release. Time declared it "Invention of the Year" for 2007. The completed iPhone had multimedia capabilities and functioned as a quad-band touch screen smartphone. A year later, the iPhone 3G was released in July 2008 with three key features: support for GPS, 3G data and tri-band UMTS/HSDPA. In June 2009, the iPhone 3GS, whose improvements included voice control, a better camera, and a faster processor, was introduced by Phil Schiller. The iPhone 4 is thinner than previous models, has a five megapixel camera capable of recording video in 720p HD, and adds a secondary front-facing camera for video calls. A major feature of the iPhone 4S, introduced in October 2011, was Siri, a virtual assistant capable of voice recognition.

iPad
iPad
 is an iOS-based line of tablet computers designed and marketed by Apple. iPad
 was released on April 3, 2010; the most recent iPad models, the iPad (2017), iPad Pro, and iPad Mini 4, were released on September 9, 2015, and March 24, 2017. The user interface is built around the device's multi-touch screen, including a virtual keyboard. The iPad includes built-in Wi-Fi and cellular connectivity on select models. As of April 2015, more than 250 million iPads have been sold.

Honors and awards
1985: National Medal of Technology (with Steve Wozniak), awarded by US President Ronald Reagan
1987: Jefferson Award for Public Service
1989: Entrepreneur of the Decade by Inc. magazine
1991: Howard Vollum Award from Reed College
2007: Named the most powerful person in business by Fortune magazine
2007: Inducted into the California Hall of Fame, located at The California Museum for History, Women and the Arts
2012: Grammy Trustees Award, an award for those who have influenced the music industry in areas unrelated to performance
2013: Posthumously inducted as a Disney Legend
2017: Steve Jobs Theatre opens at Apple Park
See also
List of artistic depictions of Steve Jobs
Timeline of Steve Jobs media
Seva Foundation
References
External links
Apple's official memorial page for Steve Jobs
"Steve Jobs: From Garage to World's Most Valuable Company." Computer History Museum.
Steve Jobs Andy Hertzfeld's The Original Macintosh (folklore.org)
Steve Jobs Steve Wozniak's woz.org
Steve Jobs (1955–2011) on IMDb
FBI Records: The Vault – Steven Paul Jobs at vault.fbi.gov
2005: Steve Jobs commencement speech at Stanford University
1995: Excerpts from an Oral History Interview with Steve Jobs, Founder, NeXT Computer – Smithsonian Institution, April 20, 1995.
1994: Steve Jobs in 1994: The Rolling Stone Interview – Rolling Stone
1990: Memory and Imagination
1983: The "Lost" Steve Jobs Speech from 1983; Foreshadowing Wireless Networking, the iPad, and the App Store (audio clip)
