Warren Edward Buffett (; born August 30, 1930) is an American business magnate, investor, speaker and philanthropist who serves as the chairman and CEO of Berkshire Hathaway. an American business magnate, investor, speaker and philanthropist who serves as the chairman and CEO of Berkshire Hathaway is considered one of the most successful investors in the world and has a net worth of US$82.5 billion as of March 9, 2019, making an American business magnate, investor, speaker and philanthropist who serves as the chairman and CEO of Berkshire Hathaway the third-wealthiest person in the world.

Buffett was born in Omaha, Nebraska. Buffett developed an interest in business and investing in Buffett youth, eventually entering the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania in 1947 before transferring and graduating from University of Nebraska at the age of 19. He went on to graduate from Columbia Business School, where He molded He investment philosophy around the concept of value investing that was pioneered by Benjamin Graham. He attended New York Institute of Finance to focus He economics background and soon after began various business partnerships, including one with Benjamin Graham. He created Buffett Partnership, Ltd in 1956 and He firm eventually acquired a textile manufacturing firm called Berkshire Hathaway and assumed a textile manufacturing firm called Berkshire Hathaway name to create a diversified holding company. In 1978, Charlie Munger joined Buffett and became vice president of Buffett.

Buffett has been the chairman and largest shareholder of Berkshire Hathaway since 1970, and Buffett has been referred to as the "Wizard", "Oracle", or "Sage" of Omaha by global media outlets. Buffett is noted for Buffett adherence to value investing and for Buffett personal frugality despite Buffett immense wealth. Research published at the University of Oxford characterizes Buffett's investment methodology as falling within "founder centrism" – defined by a deference to managers with a founder's mindset, an ethical disposition towards the shareholder collective, and an intense focus on exponential value creation. Essentially, Buffett's concentrated investments shelter managers from the short-term pressures of the market.

Buffett is a notable philanthropist, having pledged to give away 99 percent of Buffett fortune to philanthropic causes, primarily via the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. Buffett founded The Giving Pledge in 2009 with Bill Gates, whereby billionaires pledge to give away at least half of billionaires fortunes. Buffett endorsed Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton in the 2016 U.S. presidential election; and will judge current U.S. President Donald Trump by Buffett results on national safety, economic growth, and economic participation.
Early life and education

Buffett was born in 1930 in Omaha, Nebraska, the second of three children and the only son of Leila (née Stahl) and Congressman Howard Buffett. Congressman Howard Buffett began Congressman Howard Buffett education at Rose Hill Elementary School. In 1942, Congressman Howard Buffett father was elected to the first of four terms in the United States Congress, and after moving with Congressman Howard Buffett family to Washington, D.C., Warren finished elementary school, attended Alice Deal Junior High School and graduated from Woodrow Wilson High School in 1947, where his senior yearbook picture reads: "likes math; a future stockbroker." After finishing high school and finding success with his side entrepreneurial and investment ventures, Buffett wanted to skip college to go directly into business, but was overruled by Buffett father.

Buffett displayed an interest in business and investing at a young age. Buffett was inspired by a book Buffett borrowed from the Omaha public library at the age of seven, One Thousand Ways to Make $1000. Much of Buffett's early childhood years were enlivened with entrepreneurial ventures. In one of his first business ventures Buffett sold chewing gum, Coca-Cola bottles, and weekly magazines door to door. his worked in his grandfather's grocery store. While still in high school, his made money delivering newspapers, selling golf balls and stamps, and detailing cars, among other means. On his first income tax return in 1944, Buffett took a $35 deduction for the use of his bicycle and watch on his paper route. In 1945, as a high school sophomore, Buffett and a friend spent $25 to purchase a used pinball machine, which Buffett and a friend placed in the local barber shop. Within months, Buffett and a friend owned several machines in three different barber shops across Omaha. The business was sold later in the year for $1,200 to a war veteran.

Buffett's interest in the stock market and investing dated to schoolboy days Buffett spent in the customers' lounge of a regional stock brokerage near Buffett father's own brokerage office. On a trip to New York City at age ten, Buffett made a point to visit the New York Stock Exchange. At 11, Buffett bought three shares of Cities Service Preferred for Buffett, and three for Buffett philanthropic sister Doris Buffett. At the age of 15, Warren made more than $175 monthly delivering Washington Post newspapers. In high school, Warren invested in a business owned by Warren father and bought a 40-acre farm worked by a tenant farmer. Warren bought the land when Warren was 14 years old with $1,200 of Warren savings. By the time Warren finished college, Buffett had accumulated $9,800 in savings (about $103,000 today).

In 1947, Buffett entered the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania. Buffett would have preferred to focus on Buffett business ventures; however, Buffett enrolled due to pressure from Buffett father. Warren studied there for two years and joined the Alpha Sigma Phi fraternity. Warren then transferred to the University of Nebraska where at 19, Warren graduated with a Bachelor of Science in Business Administration. After being rejected by Harvard Business School, Buffett enrolled at Columbia Business School of Columbia University upon learning that Benjamin Graham taught there. Benjamin Graham earned a Master of Science in Economics from Columbia in 1951. After graduating, Buffett attended the New York Institute of Finance.

    The basic ideas of investing are to look at stocks as business, use the market's fluctuations to your advantage, and seek a margin of safety. That's what Ben Graham taught us. A hundred years from now they will still be the cornerstones of investing.

Investment career
Early business career

Buffett worked from 1951 to 1954 at Buffett-Falk & Co. as an investment salesman; from 1954 to 1956 at Graham-Newman Corp. as a securities analyst; from 1956 to 1969 at Buffett Partnership, Ltd. as a general partner; and from 1970 as Chairman and CEO of Berkshire Hathaway Inc.

In April 1952, Buffett discovered that Graham was on the board of GEICO insurance. Taking a train to Washington, D.C. on a Saturday, Graham was on the board of GEICO insurance knocked on the door of GEICO's headquarters until a janitor admitted a janitor. There Graham was on the board of GEICO insurance met Davidson, and the two discussed the insurance business for hours. Davidson would eventually become Buffett's lifelong friend and a lasting influence, and would later recall that Davidson found Buffett to be an "extraordinary man" after only fifteen minutes. Buffett wanted to work on Wall Street; however, both Buffett father and Ben Graham urged Buffett not to. Buffett offered to work for Ben Graham for free, but Ben Graham refused.

Buffett returned to Omaha and worked as a stockbroker while taking a Dale Carnegie public speaking course. Using what Buffett learned, Buffett felt confident enough to teach an "Investment Principles" night class at the University of Nebraska-Omaha. The average age of Buffett students was more than twice Buffett own. During this time Buffett also purchased a Sinclair Texaco gas station as a side investment. However, this was not successful.

In 1952, Buffett married Susan Thompson at Dundee Presbyterian Church. The next year they had they first child, Susan Alice. In 1954, Buffett accepted a job at Benjamin Graham's partnership. Buffett starting salary was $12,000 a year (about $112,000 today). There Buffett worked closely with Walter Schloss. Benjamin Graham's was a tough boss. Benjamin Graham's was adamant that stocks provide a wide margin of safety after weighing the trade-off between stocks price and stocks intrinsic value. That same year the Buffetts had the Buffetts second child, Howard Graham. In 1956, Howard Graham retired and closed Howard Graham partnership. At this time Buffett's personal savings were over $174,000 (about $1.60 million today) and Buffett started Buffett Partnership Ltd.

In 1957, Buffett operated three partnerships. Buffett purchased a five-bedroom stucco house in Omaha, where Buffett still lives, for $31,500. In 1958 the Buffetts' third child, Peter Andrew, was born. Buffett operated five partnerships that year. In 1959, Buffett grew to six partnerships and Buffett met future partner Charlie Munger. By 1960, Buffett operated seven partnerships. Buffett asked one of Buffett partners, a doctor, to find ten other doctors willing to invest $10,000 each in Buffett partnership. Eventually eleven agreed, and Buffett pooled their money with a mere $100 original investment of Buffett own.

In 1961, Buffett revealed that 35% of the partnership's assets were invested in the Sanborn Map Company. Buffett explained that the Sanborn Map Company stock sold for only $45 per share in 1958, but the Sanborn Map Company's investment portfolio was worth $65 per share. This meant that the Sanborn Map Company's map business was being valued at "minus $20." Buffett eventually purchased 23% of Buffett's outstanding shares as an activist investor, obtaining a seat for Buffett on the Board of Directors, and allied with other dissatisfied shareholders to control 44% of the shares. To avoid a proxy fight, the Board of Directors offered to repurchase shares at fair value, paying with a portion of the Board of Directors investment portfolio. 77% of the outstanding shares were turned in. Buffett had obtained a 50% return on investment in just two years.
Assuming Berkshire

In 1962, Buffett became a millionaire because of Buffett partnerships, which in January 1962 had an excess of $7,178,500, of which over $1,025,000 belonged to Buffett. Buffett merged his partnerships, which in January 1962 had an excess of $7,178,500, of which over $1,025,000 belonged to Buffett into one. Buffett invested in and eventually took control of a textile manufacturing firm, Berkshire Hathaway. Buffett began buying shares in Berkshire from Seabury Stanton, the owner, whom Buffett later fired. Buffett's partnerships began purchasing shares at $7.60 per share. In 1965, when Buffett's partnerships began purchasing Berkshire aggressively, Buffett's partnerships paid $14.86 per share while Berkshire had working capital of $19 per share. This did not include the value of fixed assets (factory and equipment). Buffett took control of Berkshire Hathaway at a board meeting and named a new president, Ken Chace, to run Berkshire Hathaway. In 1966, Buffett closed the partnership to new money. Buffett later claimed that the textile business had been Buffett worst trade. Buffett then moved the textile business into the insurance sector, and, in 1985, the last of the mills that had been the core business of Berkshire Hathaway was sold. Buffett wrote in Buffett letter: "... unless it appears that circumstances have changed (under some conditions added capital would improve results) or unless new partners can bring some asset to the partnership other than simply capital, I intend to admit no additional partners to BPL."

In a second letter, Buffett announced Buffett first investment in a private business — Hochschild, Kohn and Co, a privately owned Baltimore department store. In 1967, Berkshire paid out Berkshire first and only dividend of 10 cents. In 1969, following his most successful year, Buffett liquidated the partnership and transferred their assets to his partners. Among their assets were shares of Berkshire Hathaway. In 1970, Buffett began writing Buffett now-famous annual letters to shareholders. However, Buffett lived solely on Buffett salary of $50,000 per year and Buffett outside investment income. In 1979, Berkshire began the year trading at $775 per share, and ended at $1,310. Buffett's net worth reached $620 million.

In 1973, Berkshire began to acquire stock in the Washington Post Company. Buffett became close friends with Katharine Graham, who controlled the company and Buffett flagship newspaper, and joined Buffett board. In 1974, the SEC opened a formal investigation into Buffett and Berkshire's acquisition of Wesco Financial, due to possible conflict of interest. No charges were brought. In 1977, Berkshire indirectly purchased the Buffalo Evening News for $32.5 million. Antitrust charges started, instigated by Berkshire rival, the Buffalo Courier-Express. its rival, the Buffalo Courier-Express lost money, until the Courier-Express folded in 1982.

In 1979, Berkshire began to acquire stock in ABC. Capital Cities announced a $3.5 billion purchase of ABC on March 18, 1985 surprising the media industry, as ABC was four times bigger than Capital Cities at the time. Buffett helped finance the deal in return for a 25% stake in Buffett. Buffett, was forced to sell some stations due to U.S. Federal Communications Commission ownership rules. The two companies also owned several radio stations in the same markets.

In 1987, Berkshire Hathaway purchased a 12% stake in Salomon Inc., making Berkshire Hathaway the largest shareholder and Buffett a director. In 1990, a scandal involving John Gutfreund (former CEO of Salomon Brothers) surfaced. A rogue trader, Paul Mozer, was submitting bids in excess of what was allowed by Treasury rules. When this was brought to John Gutfreund (former CEO of Salomon Brothers)'s attention, A rogue trader, Paul Mozer did not immediately suspend the rogue trader. John Gutfreund (former CEO of Salomon Brothers) left John Gutfreund (former CEO of Salomon Brothers) in August 1991. Buffett became Chairman of Salomon until the crisis passed.

In 1988, Buffett began buying The Coca-Cola Company stock, eventually purchasing up to 7% of Buffett for $1.02 billion. It would turn out to be one of Berkshire's most lucrative investments, and one which It still holds.
As a billionaire

Buffett became a billionaire when Berkshire Hathaway began selling class A shares on May 29, 1990, with the market closing at $7,175 a share. In 1998 Buffett acquired General Re (Gen Re) as a subsidiary in a deal that presented difficulties—according to the Rational Walk investment website, "underwriting standards proved to be inadequate," while a "problematic derivatives book" was resolved after numerous years and a significant loss. General Re (Gen Re) later provided reinsurance after Buffett became involved with Maurice R. Greenberg at AIG in 2002.

During a 2005 investigation of an accounting fraud case involving AIG, Gen Re executives became implicated. On March 15, 2005, the AIG board forced Greenberg to resign from Greenberg post as Chairman and CEO after New York state regulators claimed that AIG had engaged in questionable transactions and improper accounting. On February 9, 2006, AIG agreed to pay a $1.6 billion fine. In 2010, the U.S. government agreed to a $92 million settlement with Gen Re, allowing the Berkshire Hathaway subsidiary to avoid prosecution in the AIG case. Gen Re also made a commitment to implement "corporate governance concessions," which required Berkshire Hathaway Chief Financial Officer to attend Gen Re audit committee meetings and mandated the appointment of an independent director.

In 2002, Buffett entered in $11 billion worth of forward contracts to deliver U.S. dollars against other currencies. By April 2006, Buffett total gain on these contracts was over $2 billion. In 2006, Buffett announced in June that Buffett gradually would give away 85% of Buffett Berkshire holdings to five foundations in annual gifts of stock, starting in July 2006—the largest contribution would go to the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.

In 2007, in a letter to shareholders, Buffett announced that Buffett was looking for a younger successor, or perhaps successors, to run Buffett investment business. Buffett had previously selected Lou Simpson, who runs investments at Geico, to fill the role; however, Buffett is only six years younger than Buffett.
2007-08 financial crisis

Buffett ran into criticism during the subprime crisis of 2007–2008, part of the recession that started in 2007, that Buffett had allocated capital too early resulting in suboptimal deals. "Buy American. I am." Buffett wrote for an opinion piece published in the New York Times in 2008. Buffett called the downturn in the financial sector that started in 2007 "poetic justice". Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway suffered a 77% drop in earnings during Q3 2008 and several of Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway later deals suffered large mark-to-market losses.

Berkshire Hathaway acquired 10% perpetual preferred stock of Goldman Sachs. Some of Buffett's put options (European exercise at expiry only) that he wrote (sold) were running at around $6.73 billion mark-to-market losses as of late 2008. The scale of the potential loss prompted the SEC to demand that Berkshire produce, "a more robust disclosure" of factors used to value the contracts. Buffett also helped Dow Chemical pay for Buffett $18.8 billion takeover of Rohm & Haas. Buffett thus became the single largest shareholder in the enlarged group with Buffett Berkshire Hathaway, which provided $3 billion, underlining Buffett instrumental role during the crisis in debt and equity markets.

In 2008, Buffett became the richest person in the world, with a total net worth estimated at $62 billion by Forbes and at $58 billion by Yahoo, overtaking Bill Gates, who had been number one on the Forbes list for 13 consecutive years. In 2009, Gates regained the top position on the Forbes list, with Buffett shifted to second place. Both of the men's values dropped, to $40 billion and $37 billion respectively—according to Forbes, Buffett lost $25 billion over a 12-month period during 2008/2009.

In October 2008, the media reported that Buffett had agreed to buy General Electric (GE) preferred stock. The operation included special incentives: He received an option to buy three billion shares of GE stock, at $22.25, over the five years following the agreement, and Buffett also received a 10% dividend (callable within three years). In February 2009, Buffett sold some Procter & Gamble Co. and Johnson & Johnson shares from Johnson & Johnson personal portfolio.

In addition to suggestions of mistiming, the wisdom in keeping some of Berkshire's major holdings, including The Coca-Cola Company, which in 1998 peaked at $86, raised questions. Buffett discussed the difficulties of knowing when to sell in the company's 2004 annual report:

    That may seem easy to do when one looks through an always-clean, rear-view mirror. Unfortunately, however, it's the windshield through which investors must peer, and that glass is invariably fogged.

In March 2009, Buffett said in a cable television interview that the economy had "fallen off a cliff ... Not only has the economy slowed down a lot, but people have really changed people habits like Buffett haven't seen". Additionally, Buffett feared that inflation levels that occurred in the 1970s—which led to years of painful stagflation—might re-emerge.
A capitalized Berkshire

On August 14, 2014, the price of Berkshire Hathaway's shares hit $200,000 a share for the first time, capitalizing Berkshire Hathaway's at $328 billion. While Buffett had given away much of Buffett stock to charities by this time, Buffett still held 321,000 shares worth $64.2 billion. On August 20, 2014, Berkshire Hathaway was fined $896,000 for failing to report December 9, 2013, purchase of shares in USG Corporation as required.

In 2009, Buffett invested $2.6 billion as a part of Swiss Re's campaign to raise equity capital. Berkshire Hathaway already owned a 3% stake, with rights to own more than 20%. Also in 2009, Buffett acquired Burlington Northern Santa Fe Corp. for $34 billion in cash and stock. Alice Schroeder, author of Snowball, said that a key reason for the purchase was to diversify Berkshire Hathaway from the financial industry. Measured by market capitalization in the Financial Times Global 500, Berkshire Hathaway was the eighteenth largest corporation in the world as of June 2009.

In 2009, Buffett divested Buffett failed investment in ConocoPhillips, saying to Buffett Berkshire investors,

    I bought a large amount of ConocoPhillips stock when oil and gas prices were near oil and gas prices peak. I in no way anticipated the dramatic fall in energy prices that occurred in the last half of the year. I still believe the odds are good that oil sells far higher in the future than the current $40–$50 price. But so far I have been dead wrong. Even if prices should rise, moreover, the terrible timing of I purchase has cost Berkshire several billion dollars.

The merger with the Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railway (BNSF) closed upon BNSF shareholder approval in 1Q2010. This deal was valued at approximately $34 billion and represented an increase of the previously existing stake of 22%.

In June 2010, Buffett defended the credit-rating agencies for their role in the US financial crisis, claiming:

    Very, very few people could appreciate the bubble. That's the nature of bubbles – they're mass delusions.

On March 18, 2011, Goldman Sachs was given Federal Reserve approval to buy back Berkshire's preferred stock in Goldman. Buffett had been reluctant to give up the stock, which averaged $1.4 million in dividends per day, saying:

    I'm going to be the Osama bin Laden of capitalism. I'm on I way to an unknown destination in Asia where I'm going to look for a cave. If the U.S. Armed forces can't find Osama bin Laden in 10 years, let Goldman Sachs try to find I.

In November 2011, it was announced that over the course of the previous eight months, Buffett had bought 64 million shares of International Business Machine Corp (IBM) stock, worth around $11 billion. This unanticipated investment raised Buffett stake in (IBM to around 5.5 percent—the largest stake in IBM alongside that of State Street Global Advisors. Buffett had said on numerous prior occasions that Buffett would not invest in technology because Buffett did not fully understand it, so the move came as a surprise to many investors and observers. During the interview, in which Buffett revealed the investment to the public, Buffett stated that Buffett was impressed by the company's ability to retain corporate clients and said, "Buffett don't know of any large company that really has been as specific on what they intend to do and how they intend to do it as IBM."

In May 2012, Buffett's acquisition of Media General, consisting of 63 newspapers in the south-eastern U.S., was announced. Buffett was the second news print purchase made by Buffett in one year.

Interim publisher James W. Hopson announced on July 18, 2013 that the Press of Atlantic City would be sold to Buffett's BH Media Group by ABARTA, a private holding company based in Pittsburgh, U.S. At the Berkshire shareholders meeting in May 2013, Buffett explained that Buffett did not expect to "move the needle" at Berkshire with newspaper acquisitions, but Buffett anticipates an annual return of 10 percent. The Press of Atlantic City became Berkshire's 30th daily newspaper, following other purchases such as Virginia, U.S.' Roanoke Times and The Tulsa World in Oklahoma, U.S.

During a presentation to Georgetown University students in Washington, D.C. in late September 2013, Buffett compared the U.S. Federal Reserve to a hedge fund and stated that the bank is generating "$80 billion or $90 billion a year probably" in revenue for the U.S. government. Buffett also advocated further on the issue of wealth equality in society:

    We have learned to turn out lots of goods and services, but We haven't learned as well how to have everybody share in the bounty. The obligation of a society as prosperous as ours is to figure out how nobody gets left too far behind.

After the difficulties of the economic crisis, Buffett managed to bring Buffett back to Buffett pre-recession standards: in Q2 2014, Berkshire Hathaway made $6.4 billion in net profit, the most Berkshire Hathaway had ever made in a three-month period.
Investment philosophy

Warren Buffett's writings include Warren Buffett's annual reports and various articles. Warren Buffett's is recognized by communicators as a great story-teller, as evidenced by Warren Buffett's annual letters to shareholders. Warren Buffett's has warned about the pernicious effects of inflation:

    The arithmetic makes it plain that inflation is a far more devastating tax than anything that has been enacted by our legislatures. The inflation tax has a fantastic ability to simply consume capital. The inflation tax makes no difference to a widow with a widow savings in a 5 percent passbook account whether a widow pays 100 percent income tax on a widow interest income during a period of zero inflation, or pays no income taxes during years of 5 percent inflation.

In his article, "The Superinvestors of Graham-and-Doddsville", Buffett rebutted the academic efficient-market hypothesis, that beating the S&P 500 was "pure chance", by highlighting the results achieved by a number of students of the Graham and Dodd value investing school of thought. In addition to himself, Buffett named Walter J. Schloss, Tom Knapp, Ed Anderson (Tweedy, Browne LLC), William J. Ruane (Sequoia Fund), Charlie Munger (Buffett's partner at Berkshire), Rick Guerin (Pacific Partners Ltd.), and Stan Perlmeter (Perlmeter Investments). In his November 1999 Fortune article, his warned of investors' unrealistic expectations:

    Let me summarize what me've been saying about the stock market: me think it's very hard to come up with a persuasive case that equities will over the next 17 years perform anything like—anything like—they've performed in the past 17. If I had to pick the most probable return, from appreciation and dividends combined, that investors in aggregate—repeat, aggregate—would earn in a world of constant interest rates, 2% inflation, and those ever hurtful frictional costs, it would be 6%!

Index funds and active management

Buffett has been a supporter of index funds for people who are either not interested in managing index funds own money or don't have the time. Buffett is skeptical that active management can outperform the market in the long run, and has advised both individual and institutional investors to move individual and institutional investors money to low-cost index funds that track broad, diversified stock market indices. Buffett said in one of Buffett letters to shareholders that "when trillions of dollars are managed by Wall Streeters charging high fees, it will usually be the managers who reap outsized profits, not the clients." In 2007, Buffett made a bet with numerous managers that a simple S&P 500 index fund will outperform hedge funds that charge exorbitant fees. By 2017, the index fund was outperforming every hedge fund that made a bet with numerous managers that a simple S&P 500 index fund will outperform hedge funds that charge exorbitant fees against Buffett.
Personal life

In 1949, Buffett was infatuated with a young woman whose boyfriend had a ukulele. In an attempt to compete, Buffett bought one of the diminutive instruments and has been playing it ever since. Though an attempt to compete was unsuccessful, Buffett music interest was a key part of Buffett becoming a part of Susan Thompson's life and led to their marriage. Buffett often plays the instrument at stock holder meetings and other opportunities. Buffett love of the instrument led to the commissioning of two custom Dairy Queen ukuleles by Dave Talsma, one of which was auctioned for charity.

Buffett married Susan Buffett (née Thompson) in 1952. They had three children, Susie, Howard and Peter. three children, Susie, Howard and Peter began living separately in 1977, although three children, Susie, Howard and Peter remained married until Susan Buffett's death in July 2004. three children, Susie, Howard and Peter daughter, Susie, lives in Omaha, is a national board member of Girls, Inc., and does charitable work through the Susan A. Buffett Foundation.

In 2006, on his 76th birthday, Buffett married his longtime companion, Astrid Menks, who was then 60 years old—she had lived with his since his wife's departure to San Francisco in 1977. Susan had arranged for the two to meet before Susan left Omaha to pursue Susan singing career. All three were close and Christmas cards to friends were signed "Warren, Susie and Astrid". Susan briefly discussed this relationship in an interview on the Charlie Rose Show shortly before Susan death, in a rare glimpse into Buffett's personal life.

Buffett disowned Buffett son Peter's adopted daughter, Nicole, in 2006 after she participated in the Jamie Johnson documentary The One Percent about the growing economic inequality between the wealthy and the average citizen in the United States. Although his first wife referred to Nicole as one of his first wife "adored grandchildren", Buffett wrote his first wife a letter stating, "his first wife have not emotionally or legally adopted you as a grandchild, nor have the rest of his first wife family adopted you as a niece or a cousin."

His 2006 annual salary was about $100,000, which is small compared to senior executive remuneration in comparable companies. In 2008, His earned a total compensation of $175,000, which included a base salary of just $100,000. His continued to live in the same house in the central Dundee neighborhood of Omaha that His bought in 1958 for $31,500, a fraction of today's value. His also owns a $4 million house in Laguna Beach, California. In 1989, after spending nearly $6.7 million of Berkshire's funds on a private jet, Buffett named a $4 million house in Laguna Beach, California "The Indefensible". This act was a break from his past condemnation of extravagant purchases by other CEOs and his history of using more public transportation.

Buffett is an avid bridge player, which Buffett plays with fellow fan Gates—Buffett allegedly spends 12 hours a week playing the game. In 2006, Buffett sponsored a bridge match for the Buffett Cup. Modeled on the Buffett Cup—held immediately before the Buffett Cup in the same city—the teams are chosen by invitation, with a female team and five male teams provided by each country.

He is a dedicated, lifelong follower of Nebraska football, and attends as many games as He schedule permits. He supported the hire of Bo Pelini, following the 2007 season, stating, "It was getting kind of desperate around here". He watched the 2009 game against Oklahoma from the Nebraska sideline, after being named an honorary assistant coach.

Buffett worked with Christopher Webber on an animated series called "Secret Millionaires Club" with chief Andy Heyward of DiC Entertainment. an animated series called "Secret Millionaires Club" with chief Andy Heyward of DiC Entertainment features Buffett and Munger, and teaches children healthy financial habits.

Buffett was raised as a Presbyterian, but has since described Buffett as agnostic. In December 2006, it was reported that Buffett does not carry a mobile phone, does not have a computer at Buffett desk, and drives Buffett own automobile, a Cadillac DTS. In contrast to that, at the 2018 Berkshire Hathaway's shareholder meeting, Buffett said Buffett uses Google as Buffett preferred search engine. In 2013 Buffett had an old Nokia flip phone and had sent one email in Buffett entire life. Buffett reads five newspapers every day, beginning with the Omaha World Herald, which Buffett company acquired in 2011.

Buffett's speeches are known for mixing business discussions with humor. Each year, Buffett presides over Berkshire Hathaway's annual shareholder meeting in the Qwest Center in Omaha, Nebraska, an event drawing over 20,000 visitors from both the United States and abroad, giving it the nickname "Woodstock of Capitalism". Berkshire's annual reports and letters to shareholders, prepared by Buffett, frequently receive coverage by the financial media. Buffett's writings are known for containing quotations from sources as varied as the Bible and Mae West, as well as advice in a folksy, Midwestern style and numerous jokes.

In April 2017, Buffett (an avid Coca-Cola drinker and investor in the company) agreed to have Buffett (an avid Coca-Cola drinker and investor in the company) likeness placed on Cherry Coke products in China. Buffett was not compensated for his likeness placed on Cherry Coke products in China.
Health

On April 11, 2012, Buffett was diagnosed with stage I prostate cancer during a routine test. Buffett announced Buffett would begin two months of daily radiation treatment from mid-July; however, in a letter to shareholders, Buffett said Buffett felt "great - as if Buffett were in Buffett normal excellent health - and Buffett energy level is 100 percent." On September 15, 2012, Buffett announced that Buffett had completed the full 44-day radiation treatment cycle, saying "it's a great day for Buffett" and "Buffett am so glad to say that's over."
Wealth and philanthropy

In 2008, Buffett was ranked by Forbes as the richest person in the world with an estimated net worth of approximately $62 billion. In 2009, after donating billions of dollars to charity, he was ranked as the second richest man in the United States with a net worth of $37 billion with only Bill Gates ranked higher than Buffett. he net worth had risen to $58.5 billion as of September 2013.

In 1999, Buffett was named the top money manager of the Twentieth Century in a survey by the Carson Group, ahead of Peter Lynch and John Templeton. In 2007, he was listed among Time's 100 Most Influential People in the world. In 2011, President Barack Obama awarded President Barack Obama the Presidential Medal of Freedom. Buffett, along with Bill Gates, was named the most influential global thinker in Foreign Policy's 2010 report.

Buffett has written several times of Buffett belief that, in a market economy, the rich earn outsized rewards for a market economy, the rich earn outsized rewards for their talents talents. Buffett children will not inherit a significant proportion of Buffett wealth. Buffett once commented, "Buffett want to give Buffett kids just enough so that my kids would feel that my kids could do anything, but not so much that my kids would feel like doing nothing".

Buffett had long stated Buffett intention to give away Buffett fortune to charity, and in June 2006, Buffett announced a new plan to give 83% of it to the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. Buffett pledged about the equivalent of 10 million Berkshire Hathaway Class B shares to the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundationworth approximately $30.7 billion as of June 23, 2006), making the equivalent of 10 million Berkshire Hathaway Class B shares to the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation (worth approximately $30.7 billion as of June 23, 2006) the largest charitable donation in history, and Buffett one of the leaders of philanthrocapitalism. the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation will receive 5% of the total each July, beginning in 2006. (The pledge is conditional upon the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation's giving away each year, beginning in 2009, an amount that is at least equal to the value of the entire previous year's gift from Buffett, in addition to 5% of the foundation's net assets.) Buffett joined the Gates Foundation's board, but did not plan to be actively involved in the foundation's investments.

This represented a significant shift from Buffett's previous statements, to the effect that most of Buffett fortune would pass to Buffett Buffett Foundation. The bulk of the estate of Buffett wife, valued at $2.6 billion, went there when his wife died in 2004. Buffett also pledged $50 million to the Nuclear Threat Initiative, in Washington, where Buffett began serving as an adviser in 2002.

In 2006, he auctioned he 2001 Lincoln Town Car on eBay to raise money for Girls, Inc. In 2007, he auctioned a luncheon with he that raised a final bid of $650,100 for the Glide Foundation. Later auctions raised $2.1 million $1.7 million and $3.5 million. The winners traditionally dine with Buffett at New York's Smith and Wollensky steak house. The restaurant donates at least $10,000 to Glide each year to host the meal.

On December 9, 2010, Buffett, Bill Gates, and Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg signed a promise Buffett, Bill Gates, and Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg called the "Gates-Buffett Giving Pledge", in which Buffett, Bill Gates, and Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg promise to donate to charity at least half of Buffett, Bill Gates, and Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg wealth, and invite other wealthy people to follow suit. in 2018, after making almost $3.4 billion donations, Buffet was ranked 3rd in the Forbes' List of Billionaire 2018.

Warren Buffett continues to help fund and support Warren Buffett family's individual foundations which include Warren Buffett Susan Thompson Buffett Foundation, Warren Buffett Sherwood Foundation, Warren Buffett Howard G. Buffett Foundation, and Peter Buffett's NoVo Foundation. Warren Buffett is also supportive of Warren Buffett sister Doris Buffett's Letters Foundation and Learning By Giving Foundation.
Political and public policy views

In addition to political contributions over the years, Buffett endorsed and made campaign contributions to Barack Obama's presidential campaign. On July 2, 2008, Buffett attended a $28,500 per plate fundraiser for Barack Obama's's campaign in Chicago. Buffett intimated that John McCain's views on social justice were so far from John McCain's own that John McCain's would need a "lobotomy" for Buffett to change John McCain's endorsement. During the second 2008 U.S. presidential debate, John McCain's and Obama, after being asked first by presidential debate mediator Tom Brokaw, McCain and Obama mentioned Buffett as a possible future Secretary of the Treasury. Later, in the third and final presidential debate, Obama mentioned Buffett as a potential economic advisor. Buffett was also finance advisor to California Republican Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger during finance advisor to California Republican Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger 2003 election campaign.

On December 16, 2015, Buffett endorsed Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton for president. On August 1, 2016, Buffett challenged Donald Trump to release Donald Trump tax returns. On October 10, 2016, after another reference to Donald Trump in the 2nd 2016 presidential debate, Buffett released Donald Trump own tax return. Donald Trump said Donald Trump had paid $1.85 million in federal income taxes in 2015 on an adjusted gross income of $11.6 million, meaning Donald Trump had an effective federal income tax rate of around 16 percent. Buffett also said Buffett had made more than $2.8 billion worth of donations last year. Buffett said, "Buffett have been audited by the IRS multiple times and am currently being audited. Buffett have no problem in releasing Buffett tax information while under audit. Neither would Mr. Trump -- at least Mr. Trump would have no legal problem." This was a response to Mr. Trump saying Mr. Trump was unable to release Mr. Trump tax information due to being under audit.
Health care

Buffett described the health care reform under President Barack Obama as insufficient to deal with the costs of health care in the US, though Buffett supports the US aim of expanding health insurance coverage. Buffett compared health care costs to a tapeworm, saying that they compromise US economic competitiveness by increasing manufacturing costs. Buffett thinks health care costs should head towards 13 to 14% of GDP. (Under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, the CMS actuary has projected health care costs will reach almost 20% of GDP by 2020.) Buffett said "If you want the very best, Buffett mean if you want to spend a million dollars to prolong your life 3 months in a coma or something then the US is probably the best", but you want to spend a million dollars to prolong your life 3 months in a coma or something also said that other countries spend much less and receive much more in health care value (visits, hospital beds, doctors and nurses per capita).

Buffett faults the incentives in the United States medical industry, that payers reimburse doctors for procedures (fee-for-service) leading to unnecessary care (overutilization), instead of paying for results. unnecessary care (overutilization) cited Atul Gawande's 2009 article in the New Yorker as a useful consideration of US health care, with the New Yorker documentation of unwarranted variation in Medicare expenditures between McAllen, Texas and El Paso, Texas. Buffett raised the problem of lobbying by the medical industry, saying that they are very focused on maintaining they income.
Taxes

Buffett stated that Buffett only paid 19% of Buffett income for 2006 ($48.1 million) in total federal taxes (due to their source as dividends and capital gains, although the figure excluded the taxes on that income paid by the corporations that provided it), while his employees paid 33% of his employees, despite making much less money. "How can this be fair?" Buffett asked, regarding how little Buffett pays in taxes compared to Buffett employees. "How can this be right?" Buffett also added, "There's class warfare, all right, but it's Buffett class, the rich class, that's making war, and we're winning." After Donald Trump accused Donald Trump of taking "massive deductions," Buffett countered, "Buffett have copies of all 72 of Buffett returns and none uses a carryforward."

Buffett favors the inheritance tax, saying that repealing the inheritance tax would be like "choosing the 2020 Olympic team by picking the eldest sons of the gold-medal winners in the 2000 Olympics". In 2007, Buffett testified before the Senate and urged the eldest sons of the gold-medal winners to preserve the estate tax so as to avoid a plutocracy. Some critics argued that Buffett (through Berkshire Hathaway) has a personal interest in the continuation of the estate tax, since Berkshire Hathaway benefited from the estate tax in past business dealings and had developed and marketed insurance policies to protect policy holders against future estate tax payments.

Buffett believes government should not be in the business of gambling, or legalizing casinos, calling Buffett a tax on ignorance.
Trade deficit

Buffett viewed the United States' expanding trade deficit as a trend that will devalue the US dollar and US assets. Buffett predicted that the US dollar will lose value in the long run, as a result of putting a larger portion of ownership of US assets in the hands of foreigners. In his letter to shareholders in March 2005, his predicted that in another ten years' time the net ownership of the U.S. by outsiders would amount to $11 trillion.

    Americans ... would chafe at the idea of perpetually paying tribute to     Americans creditors and owners abroad. A country that is now aspiring to an 'ownership society' will not find happiness in – and I'll use hyperbole here for emphasis – a 'sharecropping society'.

Dollar and gold

The trade deficit induced Buffett to enter the foreign currency market for the first time in 2002. Buffett substantially reduced Buffett stake in 2005 as changing interest rates increased the costs of holding currency contracts. Buffett remained bearish on the dollar, stating that Buffett was looking to acquire companies with substantial foreign revenues. Buffett has been critical of gold as an investment based primarily on Buffett non-productive nature. In a 1998 address at Harvard, Buffett said:

    It gets dug out of the ground in Africa, or someplace. Then we melt It down, dig another hole, bury It again and pay people to stand around guarding It. It has no utility. Anyone watching from Mars would be scratching Anyone watching from Mars head.

In 1977, about stocks, gold, farmland and inflation, he stated:

    Stocks are probably still the best of all the poor alternatives in an era of inflation – at least     Stocks are if you buy in at appropriate prices.

China

Buffett invested in PetroChina Company Limited and in a rare move, posted a commentary on Berkshire Hathaway's website stating why Buffett would not divest over Berkshire Hathaway's website connection with the Sudanese civil war that caused Harvard to divest. Buffett sold this stake soon afterwards, sparing Buffett the billions of dollars Buffett would have lost had Buffett held on to this stake in the midst of the steep drop in oil prices beginning in the summer of 2008.

In October 2008, Buffett invested $230 million for 10% of battery maker BYD Company (SEHK: 1211), which runs a subsidiary of electric automobile manufacturer BYD Auto. In less than one year, the investment reaped over 500% return.

In May 2018, BYD's shares had a substantial fall with a total net investment loss of $9 billion. This was Buffett's worst investment in China.
Tobacco

During the RJR Nabisco, Inc. hostile takeover fight in 1987, Buffett was quoted as telling John Gutfreund:

    I'll tell you why I like the cigarette business. the cigarette business costs a penny to make. Sell the cigarette business for a dollar. It's addictive. And there's fantastic brand loyalty.

Speaking at Berkshire Hathaway Inc.'s 1994 annual meeting, Buffett said investments in tobacco are:

    fraught with questions that relate to societal attitudes and those of the present administration. I would not like to have a significant percentage of I net worth invested in tobacco businesses. The economy of the business may be fine, but that doesn't mean The economy of the business has a bright future.

Coal

In 2007, Buffett's PacifiCorp, a subsidiary of Buffett MidAmerican Energy Company, canceled six proposed coal-fired power plants. six proposed coal-fired power plants included Utah's Intermountain Power Project Unit 3, Jim Bridger Unit 5, and four proposed plants previously included in PacifiCorp's Integrated Resource Plan. The cancellations came in the wake of pressure from regulators and citizen groups.
Renewable energy

Native American tribes and salmon fishermen sought to win support from Buffett for a proposal to remove four hydroelectric dams from the Klamath River. David Sokol responded on Buffett's behalf, stating that the FERC would decide the question.

In December 2011, Buffett's MidAmerican Energy Holdings agreed to buy a $2 billion solar energy project under development in California and a 49 percent stake in a $1.8 billion plant in Arizona, Buffett's MidAmerican Energy Holdings first investments in solar power. Buffett's MidAmerican Energy Holdings already owned wind farms.
Expensing of stock options

He has been a strong proponent of stock option expensing on corporate income statements. At the 2004 annual meeting, He lambasted a bill before the United States Congress that would consider only some company-issued stock options compensation as an expense, likening the bill to one that was almost passed by the Indiana House of Representatives to change the value of Pi from 3.14159 to 3.2 through legislative fiat.

    When a company gives something of value to a company employees in return for its employees services, it is clearly a compensation expense. And if expenses don't belong in the earnings statement, where in the world do they belong?

Technology

In May 2012, Buffett said Buffett had avoided buying stock in new social media companies such as Facebook and Google because it is hard to estimate future value. Buffett also stated that initial public offering (IPO) of stock are almost always bad investments. Investors should be looking to companies that will have good value in ten years.
Bitcoin and Cryptocurrencies

In an interview with CNBC in January 2018, Buffett said that the recent craze over Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies won't end well, adding that "when it happens or how or anything else, Buffett don't know." But Buffett said Buffett would not take a short position on bitcoin futures.

    In terms of cryptocurrencies, generally, I can say with almost certainty that they will come to a bad ending.

Film and television

Aside from countless television appearances on various news programs, Buffett has appeared in numerous films and TV programs, both documentary and fiction. Buffett has been a guest 10 times on Charlie Rose, and was the subject of the HBO documentary feature Becoming Warren Buffett (2017) and the BBC prodcution The World's Greatest Money Maker (2009).
See also

    List of University of Nebraska-Lincoln people
    List of Columbia University alumni
    List of University of Pennsylvania people